---
layout: post
title: Languages, and UCLA's Open Compute Facility
date: 2015-09-08 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

I'm wondering, why exactly did the English language become so popular?
Was it really because of 19th century Victorian Era industrialization?
Well, looking into the Wikipedia article on the subject, that's
basically it.  That and British Empire colonization.

20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_language#Spread_of_Modern_English

"Latin is a dead language."  Latin use to be the lingua franca, before
English took over.  Why did Latin fall?  Basically, it had to do with
the fall of the Roman empire.

20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_language

Now, I"m wondering.  Which language is the oldest language?  Could it
be Chinese?  Mandarin is another word for Standard Chinese.  And in
fact, Mandarin is the second most popular native language, after
Spanish.  English comes after Mandarin as a third, but English is
probably the most popularly used language in the world when counting
learned speakers.

20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_language  
20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_Chinese

<!-- more -->

Chinese comes close to being the oldest.  It is by far the most
popular old language still in modern use, if you exclude some of the
modernizations such as Simplified Chinese.  But by far the oldest
language still used in its original form and still with appreciable
popular use Tamil.  Plus, being of Indian origin, and with Indian
culture showing no signs of slowing down, the language has a
formidable future ahead of it.

20150908/http://www.answerbag.com/q_view/24988?ref=W_Ask&utm_source=Ask  
20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamil_language  
20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamil_numerals

I don't think many people still use the Classic Greek language in a
modern context.  Otherwise, Greek would have been a candidate for
consideration.

Another interesting find.  Kanbun, like at work, right?

20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classical_Chinese  
20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanbun

What about Arabic?  Well, that's comparatively new to the others.  Not
quite old enough for me.

20150908/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arabic

----------

Side note.  I'm impressed by UCLA's open computing facility.  They run
Debian GNU/Linux.  They give everyone mechanical keyboards.  They give
everyone server space.  They really know how to do things.

20150909/https://www.ocf.berkeley.edu/  
20150909/https://hello.ocf.berkeley.edu/
