---
layout: post
title: Installing operating systems, communities, languages
date: 2015-09-06 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Wow, it's been a really long time since I haven't written this down.
On installing operating systems.  How do you do it?  That depends on
the operating system.  What holds consistently across all operating
systems, though, is that the number of steps to do so is subject to
vary.  At first, the process was simple.  It only involved a small
handful of steps.  But then as the software involved got more
complicated, the steps increased to a point where people developed
automated installers to help them out.  Yet, here's an even more
subtle point.  What do you do when you're just before the point where
you should develop an automated installer?  Do you create the
automation system, or do you push on, just doing one more step
manually?  This is a really hard question to answer.  It is even
harder when you try to put a beginner in this position.  Oh, they
weren't considering beginners.  Or oh, yeah, they'd like to develop an
automated installer, but it's easier to just type the commands
manually one more time than to develop the automation system.  Or
maybe they really want to understand how the system works internally,
and to do so, they prefer to do more steps manually.

It depends on how rapidly they want to grow their community.  If they
are not anticipating community growth, then the commands will remain
long and baroque.  Plus, there will be very little in the way of
documentation.  If they can barely afford one techie, and that one
techie manages to work in that environment, that's all that matters,
the cheap do-getters say.  And going cheap economically sometimes
makes sense, they say.  Yes it does.

<!-- more -->

----------

Problems with teaching programming languages.  These happen to be the
same problems facing the teaching of human languages too.  Popularity
politics.  Spanish is a more marketable language, they say.  That's
why they teach Spanish and not something else like Chinese, Japanese,
Korean, or Vietnamese.  CJKV, as those in the community like to say.

They teach Java because it's the most popular.  But it's not the best,
it turns out.  It's alright, but other programming languages are
better.  Let's go over why this is.  Interface complexity, for the
most part.

----------

Oh, that's nothing new.  Are new things good things?  That is the
question.  Nontraditional?
