---
layout: post
title: Differences between humans and computers
date: 2015-09-11 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Differences between humans and computers.  In humans, only the highest
levels of the brain are directly and quickly reprogrammable.  In
computers, _every_ level of the machine is directly and quickly
reprogrammable.  Is there an advantage to the limitations of the human
brain?  Yes.  Try holding your breath indefinitely, by only
controlling your breathing from your brain but keeping your mouth and
nose unobstructed, for example.  Eventually, you'll go unconscious,
but when you do, you'll start breathing again.  Ah ha!  Your lower
levels of your brain knew that you were foolish, O pie-in-the-sky
conscious intelligent being.

On the other hand, take this example.  You're sticking your hands
inside of a tight computer case that was recently turned on.  You
happen to touch one of the heads of a high voltage capacitor and you
get shocked.  Your nervous system causes you to jerk indiscriminately
and your hand rams up against a sharp metal edge inside the computer
case and you get severely cut.  Was that an intelligent thing to do?
Of course not, but the low levels of your body could not have known
any better.

<!-- more -->

And what about computers.  Bricking.  So, there are both advantages
and disadvantages to both systems, but the cases are different.
Computers are optimized to satisfy commercial and political demands
with the current state-of-the-art of technology, whereas humans
evolved to have a long-lasting idiot-resistant bodies for general
danger cases and scenarios.  Howver, for cool new innovations and
short-lived technologies, the human body does not attempt to adapt to
those things at the innate level.  After all, the technologies will be
short-lived, and any biological memory advantageous to them will soon
become obsolete in future generations.  Have it both ways.

Whereas for computers, the obsolescence is embodied in physical
hardware changes.  Computers are inherently short-lived, so it makes
sense to design short-term advantages directly into the hardware,
whereas humans are long-lived.  At present, no computer system has
proved a formidable long-term life record, those 8-bit and
16-bit embedded systems are breaking ground in this field.

Neuroscientists are working on documenting the hardware interface to
the memory circuits of the human brain, or at least in part to be able
to successfully create computer memory prosthetics.

Perhaps the differences are more important than the similarities.  But
the biggest difference of all, is that there's a much bigger economy
behind learning about computers than there is behind learning about
the human brain.  There's so many more employers willing to pay you
good money if you've studied computers well.  That being said, people
of the future will tend to study computers first, and the human brain
second, primarily through their study of computers as they see fit.
As a matter of fact, that's part of the reason why early brain
researchers didn't make as much progress as they do today.  Computers
come first in today's economy.  They channel and control the world's
economic flow.
