---
layout: post
title: DSLR cameras with 4K video available?  And other camera information
date: 2016-12-15 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [pentax-k-1-camera]
tags: [pentax-k-1-camera]
---

Wait, wait, wait, there are DSLR cameras with 4K video support
available?  Indeed, there are, and they were released early this year,
just like the Pentax K-1.  But Pentax doesn't have any such offerings.

The difference?  They tend to have lower density image sensors, and
they cost a lot more.  They increased cost is probably due to the use
of more expensive internal electronics to shuttle around that kind of
extra bandwidth, along with needing to pay for additional patent
royalties to distribute software that encodes compressed 4K video.
Yikes, ouch, that's too bad for the patent royalty issue at hand.

20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/4K_resolution#Recording  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Taipei_IT_Month_Sony_FDR-AX1_20131130_2.jpg  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_4K_video_recording_devices  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canon_EOS-1D_X_Mark_II  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canon_EOS_5D_Mark_IV  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikon_D5  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikon_D500  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sony_Alpha_7#.CE.B17S

And you ask, what about Sony's cameras?  They use a myriad number of
different lens mounts.  Ouch.  And I thought the purpose of
interchangable lenses was to eliminate the issue of needing to buy new
lenses of every different type for different cameras!  Well, in some
sense, it is.

20161215/https://www.dpreview.com/reviews/sony-alpha-a7r

<!-- more -->

Hey, but guess what?  Looking into this further.  The E-mount is the
beast, but the A-mount?  It came from Konica Minolta when Sony bought
out their photography business.  So that is the sane lens mount that
is available on Sony cameras.  Actually, that's not entirely correct,
but you get the idea.

20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sony_E-mount  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sony_A-mount

----------

Side note here.  Wait, there's an open hardware 4K image sensor?  Wow,
that's really great!  Unfortunately, the Pentax K-1 DSLR does not use
it.

20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AXIOM_%28camera%29

What's Super 35?  Well, it relates to 35 mm cinema film, which is _not
to be confused_ with 35 mm still camera film.  And why do we call 35
mm still camera film "35 mm" if it is really "36 mm" across?  Well,
unfortunately, the Wikipedia article does not explain that in full, so
we are left to wonder how that came about.  It seems to be a vintage
from the earlier days of cutting 70 mm film down into 35 mm film, but
when the "offical" formats became available, as a matter of fact of
aspect ratio, 36 mm X 24 mm was adopted by cameras.  Yeah, that makes
sense.  In the horizontal direction, one can flexibly alter the
dimensions (somewhat), and this applied to the sprocket holes that
Kodak specified, but not so much in the vertical dimension.  Oh, that
makes so much more sense.  Yes, so the first specified dimension came
from the cut and hack practice, but when the sprocket holes were later
specified and used to advance and position film in increments, they
were specified for 36 mm width.  Too bad that Wikipedia did not make
that disambiguation very clear.

20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/35mm#Super_35  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super_35

"Faster" lens?  Oh, just referring to aperture size and how that
relates to the speed one can obtain properly exposed photographs at.

20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lens_speed  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/35_mm_film  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/35mm_format  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/135_film  
20161215/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Film_gauge
