---
layout: post
title: "Library insurance, tool lending, CPSC, food safety, etc."
date: 2016-09-01 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [inven-sys, random]
tags: [inven-sys, random]
---

Okay, I'm wondering.  What does the Internet have to say about
insurance and accounting for libraries?  Because, the thing here is,
the library maintains its own inventory system, yet accountants and
insurance agents each want to use their own incompatible inventory
systems for their own purposes.  So, what's the remedy between the
incompatibility between the disparate systems?  Surely, there's got to
be a lot of information about this on the Internet!  Unfortunately, I
have failed to find very much.

Instead, what I found was information on this "new invention" of the
modern era of "tool lending libraries."  Now, this is an interesting
new addition to the chaos of the world, because in addition to the
systems designed for book lending libraries, we explicitly have "new
systems" "tailored to the needs of tool-lending libraries."  Yes,
that's where the "chaos" comes into play.

Maybe I should have searched for "Standard Operating Procedures for
libraries" or something like that.  But that is for another time.  For
now, I've got to catalog my findings in a more organized manner.

* Yeah, like you were saying.  One really good thing about academia is
  that when they write research papers, trying to search for
  information on "related work" and "previous work" is put forth as
  very important.  Unfortunately, this is considerably hard to do for
  new fields that have no standard terminology.

<!-- more -->

    * Yes, hard to do for the field that is new that has no standard
      terminology for the field itself, but you know what?  All
      professions build off of the results and past work of previous
      professions, so the search process is simplified by searching
      for the component parts rather than searching for the "main
      subject" you are after.

        * This is something very good to note when doing research.
          Why, I am rather unimpressed that in my research education
          of the past, I was not taught specifically about this
          principle.

20160901/DuckDuckGo how do libraries manage inventory insurance

20160901/http://makezine.com/2012/05/29/how-to-start-a-tool-lending-library/  
20160901/http://www.openrov.com/

So what is this one about?  This one is about using mirrors that face
each other to create interesting infinite bouncing effects.

20160901/http://makezine.com/2016/09/01/20-infinity-mirror-projects-to-reflect-on-forever/

Here is one such software package below for setting up tool lending
libraries.

20160901/http://localtools.org/2012/06/how-to-start-a-lending-library-part-1-insurance-and-operations/  
20160901/http://localtools.org/about/  
20160901/http://wsfixers.org/

* Oh yeah, one thing I have to note is the fact that using software to
  enforce business processes is a relatively new phenomenon, enabled
  only by the massive increase in storage space in computers to
  contain long strings of English text as necessary.  Before that
  advancement in storage space, computers were meant to be used for
  computation only, not for business process enforcement and training.

Okay, now this is interesting.  Library of Congress have prepared
notes on proper archival and disaster recovery.  Still, I find the
available information seems inadequate for my interests and purposes.

20160901/http://loc.gov/preservation/emergprep/insurancevaluation.html  
20160901/http://loc.gov/preservation/emergprep/index.html

Useful?  Or not so much.  One manufacturer of inventory technologies
tries to define what an inventory is.

20160901/https://www.barcodesinc.com/articles/what-is-inventory-management.htm

Okay, now I think this is the most useful find I have found so far.

20160901/http://www.nfsmi.org/documentlibraryfiles/PDF/20121114100354.pdf

What is it?  It is an inventory system document for schools.  It's
designed to teach you the general principles in running such an
inventory system, then give you some example Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) to help you get started.

Also, it is interesting, because being written a few years ago, it
presents a slightly different picture of the modern technology
environment.  And unfortunately, a few years later, it seems that we
still can't trace recalled food exactly down to the lot numbers that
need to be recalled, and keep the traceability to as small of a number
as possible.

So, you tell me?  I ask you.  We have the Global Data Synchronization
Network (GDSN)?  So, is that what I was thinking about?  All companies
upload their "one step forward, one step back" traceability
information to a single global web repository, and you can search for
the lot number of your goods to see if there is any information that
was posted about recalls?  No, unfortunately, the system is not that
advanced.  It seems it is setup to be a members-only joint, which
dramatically decreases its usefulness.  Maybe it was never actually as
useful as you thought it was to begin with.

20160901/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_Data_Synchronization_Network

recalls.gov?  I've got to visit the site!  Ha, this is what you were
looking for, wasn't it?  Well, sort of.  It turns out that for the
food recalls specifically, the information is not nearly as detailed
as I was hoping for.  No, I'm not seeing individual lot numbers that
are to be recalled, whereas other lot numbers are construed to be
safe.

20160902/http://www.recalls.gov/  
20160902/https://www.foodsafety.gov/

Now, this is interesting.  I think I've kind of learned something new
here.  Kind of.  This step places an emphasis on separating materials
used to prepare raw meat, eggs, and seafood from ready-to-eat fresh
foods.  Use different cutting board, consider using paper towels to
clean up, if using cloth towels, use separate ones and frequently wash
in the hot cycle of the washing machine.

20160902/https://www.foodsafety.gov/keep/basics/separate/index.html  
20160902/https://www.foodsafety.gov/recalls/recent/listeria.html  
20160902/https://www.foodsafety.gov/blog/2016/09/where-foodborne-illness-begins.html

The FoodKeeper app?  Where is it?  Oh, maybe it is an HTML 5 web app,
which is why I don't see anything else on this page, when viewing in
my downscaled browsers.

20160902/https://www.foodsafety.gov/keep/foodkeeperapp/

So what about not using recipes that use raw eggs?  Did I hear that
Orange Julius uses raw eggs?  What does Wikipedia have to say about
this?  It says nothing about "raw eggs," but it does say powdered egg
whites.

20160902/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orange_Julius

So what are "powdered egg whites"?  Wikipedia is being unhelpful.

20160903/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egg_white

Okay, now I found a helpful resource.  Don't worry, these products are
fully cooked using hot air to instantly dry them into powder, so they
have no risk of salmonella.

20160903/http://www.molecularrecipes.com/hydrocolloid-guide/egg-white-powder/

20160902/http://www.recalls.gov/recent.html

Now, these are some interesting recalls.  The kitchen appliance
recalls, wow, like we have some kitchen appliances that have failed in
interesting ways.

Stainless steel straws?  Those may be stylish for adults to use, but
children are recommended against using it because they may not be able
to use them safely and may cut themselves.  I like the recall remedy:
"New Instructions."

* Starbucks of Seattle.  No wonder why they were the one who pushed
  first for Wi-Fi in the coffee shop.  Lots of software developers in
  Washington.

Oh yeah, and recalls due to bad lithium batteries?  This is
interesting.  Specifically, recalling batteries that swell, expand,
and get hot under use.  No injuries were reported, in the case of the
video baby monitor.

One recall that was really interesting was that 10 different companies
recalled "hoverboards" (self-balancing scooters) due to lithium ion
battery hazards.  What am I thinking?  The fact that there are 10 of
such companies, when there was purportedly only one "inventor"
prompted one company to chase after the others at the Consumer
Electronics Show with closures, seizures, amd litigation threats.  Now
did they go even further?  Crush the competition by negotiating with
their battery suppliers to send out defective and dangerous batteries?
Aww, this is probably more of a conspiracy theory fictionalized by me
than anything else.

Tommee Tippee Sippee spill-proof cups recalled due to mold hazard?
This only applies to the models with "one-piece nozzles."  Oh, no
wonder why they were problematic.  You can't see inside of them to
determine if there is mold build-up on the inside, that's awful.

20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/Whirlpool-Recalls-Microwaves/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/McDonalds-Recalls-Step-iT-Activity-Wristbands/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/Recall-Alerts/2016/Cinmar-Recalls-World-Magnetic-Travel-Maps/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/Porta-Recalls-Residential-Elevators/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/Starbucks-to-Recall-Stainless-Steel-Beverage-Straws-to-Provide-New-Warnings/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/Recall-Alerts/2016/Frigidaire-and-Kenmore-Wall-Ovens-Recalled-by-Electrolux/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/Lorex-Recalls-Video-Baby-Monitors/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/Self-Balancing-Scooters-Hoverboards-Recalled-by-10-Firms/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/3M-Recalls-Hard-Hats/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/Direct-Distributors-Recalls-Angle-Grinders/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS  
20160902/http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Recalls/2016/Tommee-Tippee-Sippee-Cups-Recalled-by-Mayborn-USA/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=Recalls+RSS
