---
layout: post
title: Demolition, deconstruction, reusability, and similar thoughts
date: 2016-06-05 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [mat-sci, tour-de-force]
tags: [mat-sci, tour-de-force]
---

20160605/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demolition  
20160605/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deconstruction_%28building%29

* The literal meaning of the word "dilapidated" is "stones have been
  stolen from a building.

20160614/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dilapidation  
20160614/todo/south-part-episode-historic-sodopista

Efficiency and environmental friendliness.  "Environmentalism is not a
new idea."  On the contrary, lack of concern for the environment is
the new idea, as historically, humans had to reuse and share the same
living spaces for thousands of years, and given that their ways of
life traditionally did not change much over thousands of years, making
sure the environment was the same as you left it was paramount.

Sure, humans _could_ have moved around to keep living in "new" spaces,
but as a matter of fact, most human societies have preferred to keep
living in the same locations rather than keep moving around to "new"
locations.  And even among those who did need to keep moving around,
they designed their lifestyle around a portable mentality, where they
could pack up all their belongings and leave the site where they were
formerly living while leaving no traces that they were there.

Of course, in recent times, in industrialized cultures, people's
lifestyles have changed far more in far less time, so some curious new
phenomenon have emerged.

<!-- more -->

Native Americans and new industrial culture neighbors.  "Yeah, they
didn't like what they saw, but what could they do to stop them from
cutting down all the trees?"  Not just, but also those too within the
same culture, it was very hard to effectively communicate.  In other
words, there just "emerged" a cohort of humans who clearcut forests
"because they can."  If they couldn't, they obviously wouldn't.  And,
most importantly, the humans who were perpetrating this incidental
behavior probably had no "former knowledge" of what consequences it
would lead to.  They had no connection to the past, thinking that
everything they were doing was a "new idea," even though, in fact, it
wasn't.

So the same, "deconstruction is not a new idea."  In fact, it has
existed since antiquity, whereas demolition is a relatively new
practice made possible only by modern technology.  In the end,
however, it turned out to be a short-lived practice, as once it became
evident that the costs outweighed the benefits of demolition, people
switched back to doing deconstruction for most practical uses.  The
only exceptions are when parties with highly confidential or
classified documents want to destroy a site as quickly as possible and
are adamant to slower alternatives, even if they are more economic.

This is useful for comparing "file shredding" on computers.
Overwriting the file contents to make sure that no traces are
accidentally left around is more expensive, and in this sense, it
doesn't make economic sense.  However, there are many cases when
people want to do it anyways.

Wood and paper are a great example of materials that are widely used,
widely demanded, often times the preferred material for many
applications, a sustainable resource, evironmentally friendly, and
used since antiquity.  Thus, because we have a vast amount of
knowledge around the use of these materials and the best way to use
them, we know exactly what their strengths and weaknesses are.
Compared this to computers, where often times, the future is an
unknown.

Tour de Force.  Oh yeah, I really wanted to write this one down.
Environmental impact of computers.  The essential elements of
computation are copper, iron, aluminum, silicon, gold, and dopants
such as boron and phosphorous.  Of all of these elements, only the
dopants are toxic.  All the others are environmentally friendly and
occur naturally.  However, the dopants occur only in trace quantities
in the manufactured device, so the only place where they occur in
toxic quantities are in factory mass production.  But, I emphasize
this fact, that is an artifact of industrial mass production, not of
computers per se.  Trace elements occur in the human body too, which
in small quantities, are good for your health, but too much is toxic.
Now, in the industrial manufacture of processed foods with additives,
these kinds of additives can also be toxic in the factory floor.

So, that being said, computation per-se are not detrimental to the
environment.  Rather, it is the technology that surrounds them that is
environmentally unfriendly.  On an individual computer product, once
you start to zoom out from the micro-scale to the macro-scale, you
start to encounter larger and larger quantities of hazardous
substances, not just because you're talking about larger scales, but
also because these substances are occurring in pure form rather than
trace form.  Take for example the plastic casing of electronics.
Plastic is cheaper to manufacture than more environmentally-friendly
alternatives.  However, it is less opportune for the environment,
especially when coupled with brominated flame retardants (BFRs).
Also, many types of rechargeable batteries are also chemically
hazardous.  Often times, these batteries are just as much user-facing
as is the external case, as they tend to reach the end of their life
much faster than the remaining electronics and need to be changed
quickly in comparison.

Finally, the fact of electronics production.  Currently, for many
electronics, the only technology that can manufacture them is mass
production machinery.  Fundamentally by definition, mass production
requires considerable transportation, so applications that depend on
the production of new electronic's environmental impact is constrained
to the environmental impact of transportation.  Remember, modern
electronic computers had to emerge from a highly industrial tradition
that preceded it, often times one that preferred power tools even when
using them would be less efficient in every measure except the time to
complete a task.  So yes, as a technology, computers are at the top of
the pyramid, but the best thing about computers is that they enable
additional efficiencies at the lower levels, even if the underlying
technology does not fundamentally change.  Take, for example, hybrid
cars.

* Also, factories must invest a certain amount of their money on
  improving factory operation if this goal of safer and more
  environmentally-friendly factories is ever to be realized.

Much of the hype over environmentalism that has come is due to the
realization of the tremendous advancement of computers.  However, this
is a rather isolated phenomenon that generally doesn't happen in other
industries.  That being said, computers have the best future
potentials and prospects, especially local computation and closed loop
energy supply of highly efficient computers.

You might say that powering computer displays requires a major amount
of power, but this in fact is not true.  Again, there are solutions
here for saving dramatic amounts of energy.  You know lasers?  Whereas
regular non-coherent light generally requires a large amount of energy
input to get a decent amount of light output, even weak lasers are
powerful enough to cause temporary eye damage lasting for 3 months.
So, laser-based displays could be used to dramatically cut down the
amount of energy needed to power a display.  Finally, for wall-mount
displays, powerful computation could be used to implement a software
head tracker to determine the position of the humans in the room, then
shine the laser light only in that direction.  So in fact, all of a
home's computers, including the displays and speakers, could be
running off of a solar-powered energy budget, even in geographies with
weak solar energy.  (Excluding places that have no daylight for half
of the year.)  Also, I note that powering audio devices generally does
not require that much electrical energy, as the human ear is very
sensitive to even small amounts of sound energy.

Also, environmentally friendly computers are paramount when used for
environmental monitoring, where the computer may get damaged or stolen
by animals in the natural environment.  Whatever happens, it is
inevitable that the machines will get broken down and consumed by the
environment, but when that happens, that must not cause deleterious
affects on the surrounding environment.  Computers, when properly
designed, happen to be the perfect fit for environmental monitoring.

Again, I note.  These phenomenons are particular to computers, and
they should not be anticipated to happen in other technology sectors.
