---
layout: post
title: Cost evaluations for Raspberry Pi projects
date: 2016-06-03 21:30 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi]
tags: [raspberry-pi]
---

Yes, these times sure are amazing.  Let's write out the cost formula
for my 3D laser scanner, in the most cost-efficient implementation.

* $0 paper mache armature
* $2 laser diode line generator
* $3 battery holder (or other portable power device)
* $5 Raspberry Pi Zero
* $5 Raspberry Pi Zero FPC camera connector
* $11 32 GB MicroSD card
* $25 Raspberry Pi Camera

Total: $51 dollars.

And the best thing about this is?  The cost for setting up an
equivalent Scanning By Heating system is identical.  Alternatively, if
you want to reuse the as many parts as possible, then it only costs
$27 to buy the additional infrared camera and laser diode parts for
Scanning By Heating.

Now, let's consider the alternatives.

* $0 paper mache armature
* $3 battery holder (or other portable power device)
* $11 32 GB SD card
* $25 laser diode line generator
* $25 Raspberry Pi Camera
* $35 Raspberry Pi 3

Total: $99 dollars.

<!-- more -->

Wow, that's considerably more expensive, about twice as expensive as
the alternate solution.  On the other hand, it only costs twice as
much, not ten times as much, so that's worth consideration on an order
of magnitude scale.

So what were you saying?  100 Euro is too expensive for a 3D scanner?
Maybe that's not so.  Maybe it's just that the design was built using
only the parts that were available a few years earlier, but certainly
within the meantime, the costs have dropped considerably.  Yes, that's
definitely true.  It appears the system was first designed back in
2011, so that would explain the higher costs.

But you know what?  I'm surprised.  I'm surprised that despite the
fact that the core computation part and laser diode of the system has
experienced the greatest drop in price, the overall expense of the
system is still pretty high.  I guess that's because we're still
waiting for corresponding drops in price on the camera sensor.  Now,
what if we could have a high resolution camera sensor for only $5, and
the MicroSD card for only $2?

* $0 paper mache armature
* $2 4 GB MicroSD card
* $2 laser diode
* $3 battery holder (or other portable power device)
* $5 Raspberry Pi Zero
* $5 Raspberry Pi Camera
* $5 Raspberry Pi Zero FPC camera connector

Total: $22 dollars.

Wow!  That's an amazing price!  And all I have to do to get to that
price is find some way to reduce the price of the camera and the
MicroSD card.  Also, let me get this straight: I am monitoring the
cost primarily of the specialized electronics that require remote
manufacturing.  For any materials such as external casing that can be
easily made locally, that cost I do not consider, as that is an
entirely different economic equation.

However, I must note a very important fact for this use case.  Network
communications will be paramount for routing out the 3D scan data to a
higher-capacity storage device.  Otherwise, the 4 GB MicroSD card will
quickly fill up to its maximum capacity and you'll have to halt the
scanning to offload the data.  However, that workflow might not be too
bad for low-cost scanning applications.  A good compromise, as I would
say.

Now for a cheap keyboard and monitor.  What were you saying?  Use
projection displays?  Oh, that actually makes a lot of sense.  Use a
projection display for both the monitor and the keyboard.  The
keyboard is located at the bottom of the projection display, so typing
on the keyboard will not obstruct your view of other things happening
on the monitor.  Of course, what will work best with this low-cost
computer is speech-based input.  Speech-based output would also be
most convenient so that you don't have to be looking directly at the
display to get information off of it, you just have to be within the
vincity of the computer to hear the information.

So why the higher cost for the laser diode?  I think it must be due to
the solid brass structure.  That would definitely make sense as to why
the cost would be considerably increased.
