---
layout: post
title: "Unwinding film canisters, disposable cameras, camera flash
        capacitors"
date: 2016-08-20 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [pentax-k-1-camera]
tags: [pentax-k-1-camera]
---

Film camera (i.e. retro camera) notes.

Aww, got the film wound up all the way inside the canister?  No
worries, here's how to pull it out, without a _film puller_.  Er,
well, maybe there are worries here.  You really do need to have film
to stick into the canister, as that will be the only thing that gives
you the necessary curl and strength to complete the pulling.

20160820/DuckDuckGo how to remove film from canister

20160820/https://www.lomography.com/magazine/75374-get-the-film-out-the-canister-without-a-film-puller

----------

Disposable camera?  What does Wikipedia have to say about this?

20160821/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disposable_camera  
20160821/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lomography  
20160821/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coil_gun  
20160821/http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/art/2009/09/148_43411.html

So, I'm wondering.  What kind of lighting instrumentation is used
inside of a camera flash?

20160821/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_%28photography%29

Wow, I certainly didn't know that the camera flash had a much longer
history and many more intermediary technologies than I originally
thought.

So it is like you thought.  The flash bulbs that you were looking at
in your current cameras are in fact a kind of fluorescent light.
Gas-filled tube that electricity is sent through.

20160821/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_tube

Oh, but one important thing that I did learn about from reading the
flash article is that often times, bounce flash is very important for
taking good-looking photographs.  Especially with humans, the human
retina reflects red light directly back in the direction of incidence,
which is why there is the red-eye effect unless sophisticated umbrella
bounce flash is used.

Oh yeah, and bounce flash often times results in better photographs of
still objects because the ambient light gives better shadow tones and
distributions, or so I am told.  So, for still 2D photographs,
definitely yes, but what about for 3D scans?  Don't you want
straight-on flash?  Well, maybe not.  Maybe you want consistent flash
angle, and just rotate the camera independently of the flash.

Wow, and about flash safety.  80 uF capacitor?  Really dangerous, and
it too can get the problem of dielectric absorption that makes CRTs
perpetually dangerous without proper grounding.  And the exploding
flash tube problem?  Without a flash cavity and shielding behind
glass, use of the device requires eye and ear protection.  So should I
be weary of long-term use of the flash in a disposable camera?  Well,
I guess that is an unanswered question.  Oh, and some cameras charge
the flash just by being powered on or by inserting batteries?  Good
thing my vintage cameras are not among those types.
