---
layout: post
title: Abestos
date: 2016-06-05 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [mat-sci]
tags: [mat-sci]
---

20160605/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asbestos

All the lawsuits over asbestos.

20160605/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asbestos_and_the_law

Lots of interesting information here.  Oh yeah, and about people
coming in to pollute the land.  So here we have this.

20160605/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superfund  
20160605/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Popcorn_ceiling

Interesting note about asbestos and the discovery of toxicity related
to it.  Originally, asbestos was not widely used, so it was not
thought to require large regulations.  However, unfortunately it did
experience unexpected growth in use, so regulations banning it
appropriately ended up coming late.

<!-- more -->

Australia this, Australia that.  Yeah, I know, it's not about all the
people of Australia, just the industrialized non-indigenous people
there.  Yeah, but do you know why you don't so much about the
indigenous people?  Economics.  They don't chip in a notable part to
the larger economy.  By definition, their traditional ways are to live
off of the land, closed loop.  With that kind of thing going on, no
wonder why you don't hear more from them.  Although, I must admit,
sure, they can continue to get their sustenance closed-loop, but they
don't have to remain closed-loop for other communications too.

Asbestos removal?  A painstaking process to remove it piece-by-piece
before the demolition process?  Oh, come on, is it really that bad?
Yeah, like you were saying.  People want fast deletes.  But
apparently, people don't mind as much about slow construction.
