---
layout: post
title: "More reviews and info on Pentax K-1, and lots other info on
        photography"
date: 2016-12-16 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [pentax-k-1-camera]
tags: [pentax-k-1-camera]
---

Okay, so now you're calling even more into question reviews on the
Pentax K-1.  Now, you're asking, what about the professional review
articles?  Well, I'm going to look into those.

20161216/https://www.dpreview.com/reviews/pentax-k-1  
20161216/https://www.cnet.com/products/pentax-k-1-review/  
20161216/http://imaging-resource.com/PRODS/pentax-k1/pentax-k1A.HTM  
20161216/http://imaging-resource.com/PRODS/pentax-k1/pentax-k1TECH.HTM  
20161216/http://imaging-resource.com/PRODS/pentax-k1/pentax-k1-field-test.htm

* Let's look at some of the impressive showcases of how high the
  resolution of the Pentax K-1 goes.

  20161216/http://216.18.212.226/PRODS/pentax-k1/FULLRES/YIMGP1253.JPG  
  20161216/http://216.18.212.226/PRODS/pentax-k1/FULLRES/YIMGP1254-psr-no-mcomp.JPG

  Indeed, I must admit, those are pretty good pictures.  Oh yeah, and
  I really wonder about this.  Well, concede.  Do you really need high
  resolution for video?  Oh sure, it always looks nicer with high
  resolution, it's just that my concern is that, well, the purpose of
  high resolution still photographs is to be able to look around
  almost as if you were there yourself.  You know, you have the
  freedom to explore, pan, well, in 3D, look around!  But that's not
  really the purpose of video.  Video, instead, is to show you a
  directed stream of images as seen from a camera, possibly as
  scheduled by a movie director.  That is a very different motive than
  still photography.

<!-- more -->

Again, the issue brought up at hand here is the fact that this DLSR
does not offer top-of-the-line video recording and is in many ways
meant to be more of a still camera.  Video is even touted as being a
little bit burry from the reviews.  It does have a good price, but in
some ways, the Nikon D750 is comparable to the quality and price of
this Pentax camera.  On one hand, the autofocus system and image
stabilization system on this camera is not quite as good as those of
competitors.  On the other hand, this camera has some very competitive
features in being able to adjust and tweak settings over the Nikon
camera especially, and even a little better than the Canon camera.

From the field test article:

> You'll certainly find better video quality and feature sets in
> competing cameras, even ones which cost noticeably less.

* Really?  Well, I'd be shocked.  Should I keep searching?  Or should
  I still go with this camera?  Well, I do indeed want as much
  compatibility as possible, so that is really something to consider.
  "More features" wasn't entirely in my original requirements, but I
  was sort of hoping that I could get video with ease, given that this
  is a DSLR and implementing video should therefore not be as
  troublesome.  If only the card writing electronics supported the
  faster standard, UHS-II.  Well, I guess for that reason,
  implementing video is somewhat troublesome.

Indeed, some of the really good features are manual focus assist and
an LED near the lens mount to help you align lenses for changing in
the dark.

Well, you know what?  I kind of like being able to have the
uniqueness.  And besides, the lower cost is really the kind of
competitive thing I am looking for.  So let's leave things at that for
now and see if Ricoh/Pentax has better offerings in the future.

Again, even looking back at Canon's offerings in the future, just like
the time that I looked in the past, Canon still offers the very
highest resolution sensors among all DSLR camera brands.  It's also a
lot more expensive than the Pentax K-1.  Yes, so definitely, I'm
emphasizing this fact, I want to get a camera that gives me the best
quality per price point that is full frame and compatible with my
existing lenses.

20161216/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canon_EOS_5DS

Again, from the reviews above, I think that it is probably conceivable
that if you want to get an image resolution significantly higher than
that of traditional 35 mm film, you almost definitely should go with a
larger sensor camera such as a medium format DSLR.

20161216/http://www.imaging-resource.com/PRODS/pentax-k1/pentax-k1-conclusion.htm

Yeah, the above review notes that there are limitations in the memory
card speed, and that is one reason why buffering needs to be used for
multi-shot modes.  And again, we note that the camera has a slow boot
time.  Only UHS-I card speeds, not UHS-II card speeds.

Oh yeah, what does Wikipedia have to say about UHS-II?  Yes, here we
have it.

20161216/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Digital#Ultra_High_Speed_.28UHS.29_bus

More reviews:

20161216/http://www.photographyblog.com/reviews/pentax_k1_review

Oh yeah, and important point.  Shutter release on the K-1 is quiet,
which is good for nature and candid photography.

> In the Shutter & Aperture-Priority mode the camera selects the most
> appropriate ISO speed for a shutter speed and aperture combination,
> allowing you to use ISO sensitivity as a third factor in determining
> the correct exposure. As digital cameras have always offered the
> unique ability to instantly change the sensitivity, it's surprising
> that Pentax are still the only manufacturer to allow you to use ISO
> in this way.

Wow, well there we go.  We're going for a good one!  Yeah, it has its
limitations, but it also has its strengths, and again, I reiterate,
one of its best strengths is its price.

Wait.  "Slow startup time" means it takes around one second to turn
on, which by other publications, "is very quick."  So being around 2
seconds is at the threshold of being "too slow" in this case.

Oh yeah, and good news.  The camera does in fact allow for continuous
shooting at slow rates, like one per second.  So you don't need to
worry about being thrown out of continuous shooting mode at the end of
the time interval.

Oh yeah, note that this camera has an "AF assist" light.

Also, a general word.  Based off of reading the historic 1984 Pentax
SLR camera manual, various online photography websites, the modern
manual, and these Pentax camera reviews, I can definitely say that
reading the original manual, websites, and reviews are recommended
first reading, as they integrate photos, discussion of artistic
options, and the related techniques together, and provide some
articles that are nice to read with good flowing English prose.  Uh,
yeah, actually, natural language is important here, despite how much I
hate it in technical contexts.  For operating your specific camera,
the official Ricoh manual provides the raw technical information in a
not-so-pretty black and white printout.  But, just remember, as is
said on the photography reviews and websites, this camera is
definitely designed for photographers, by photographers.

Did I not write this down?  Anyways, from all the photography review
websites, it has been revealed that the Pentax K-1 actually does have
a limited form of 4K video recording: "interval recording."  I'm
guessing that this is like the ability to record 4K video for a
maximum of three minutes.  Which, I am told, is not considered real
video recording.  But, but, wait... no, that's not actually it.  The
thing here is that the minimum interval recording time is 2 seconds,
which is much too slow for video, of course.  So there you go.  It
actually doesn't support video.

20161218/https://www.ephotozine.com/article/pentax-k-1-expert-review-28884

Oh yeah, note that all the review articles are a great source of
images of the camera exterior and interior components.

Oh, so the illuminated controls actually are available on the Nikon
D5, it's just that not many cameras have that, and the Nikon D5 is
considerably more expensive.

20161218/https://luminous-landscape.com/pentax-k-1-review/

Again, we're told, not the prettiest looking camera.  Yeah, I know,
but I'm really cost concerned too, and this I'm told is where Pentax
soars with iron-heart compatibility with the historic line of gear.

Oh, but be forewarned.  Straps on tripod-mounted cameras are a tangle
hazard and can get meddled by the wind, so you might want to remove
the strap when shooting on a tripod.  Then again, if you are still
wearing the strap, this might not be an issue.  Or would it?

Again, as I have observed in the test image of the Knoxville bridge,
and as we also have commentary here, there is an issue that the
sharpness of the edges of the image is usually less than that of the
center of the image.  Yeah, one idea I thought of to combat this is to
composite multiple images together of different focus or angle.  I
believe this may have something to do with default chromatic
aberration correction, but that is just my own guess.

Oh yeah, and you were wondering.  That key word.  "Lens hood."  The
thing that you put in front of the camera lens that reduces glare and
improves contrast.

20161218/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lens_hood

And likewise for stage lights, "barn doors."  So those things you were
putting on your own drawings of computer lighting setups but not
knowing exactly what those things were.

20161218/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stage_lighting_accessories#Barn_doors

Likewise for cameras, but much less interesting in my opinion.

20161218/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matte_box

Okay, there are still more reviews out there, so I better save my
search query.

20161218/DuckDuckGo pentax k-1 review

----------

But now, I'm moving on to looking at the actual camera manual.

The camera manual is a whole lot less pretty than the 1984 manual.
Unlike the 1984 manual, this is purely a manual covering the technical
operation of the camera and makes no mention on photographic creative
and artistic techniques.  The manual is printed all in black, white,
and shades of gray.  Then again, the manual has to cover a whole lot
more technical ground given the increased complexity of the
technology, and it is overall bigger and much longer than the 1984
manual.

20161216/http://www.ricoh-imaging.co.jp/english/support/download_manual.html  
20161216/http://www.ricoh-imaging.co.jp/english/support/man-pdf/k-1.pdf  
20161216/http://www.ricoh-imaging.co.jp/english/support/man-pdf/k-1_tc.pdf

* NOTE: The "tc" manual is in Chinese.  Traditional Chinese?  Doesn't
  look like it.

A little bit concerned at first, but don't worry, there is indeed a
depth of field preview mode.

And what about flash compatibility?  Ut oh, I don't see my particular
flash unit listed, AF200T.  Is it still compatible?  Well, well, there
are mentions that the AF200T indeed works well for the K-7 and K-5
cameras, and maybe even the K-3 camera.  So, I guess if I could assume
compatibility with the K-1 camera with all flash units of these other
cameras, I would be in good business.

20161216/https://www.pentaxuser.com/forum/topic/af200t-flash-with-k7-30806  
20161216/http://kmp.bdimitrov.de/flashes/TTL/index.html  
20161216/http://www.pentaxforums.com/forums/58-troubleshooting-beginner-help/91378-pentax-k-x-flash-len-compatibility.html  
20161216/https://www.pentaxuser.com/forum/topic/flash-compatibility-49573/p-0

Oh yeah, and this was also noted many times in the reviews that the
camera was designed to use compatible battery packs and chargers with
the rest of the Pentax line, which is a very welcome feature for
photographers.

Bingo!

  The Pentax K-1 will be compatible with Pentax's lineup of TTL
  flashes as well.

20161216/http://www.adorama.com/ipxk1.html

Also note from discussion on the various linked articles above, the
AF200T is indeed a TTL flash unit, not a p-TTL flash unit apparently.
But that should be just okay, here.

  As more Pentax DSLR's are sold, an ever-larger number of them are
  reaching people who are new to Pentax and aren't sure which lenses
  they can use. By now everyone knows Pentax has the best backward
  compatibility, but most aren't sure what capabilities you give up
  with various older lenses. The purpose of this page is to let you
  know what basic functionality you'll have with any given range of
  lenses on your Pentax digital camera.

20161216/http://www.robertstech.com/compat.htm

Ah, lens rentals!  Interesting, so this is a site I could go to for
lens rentals.  Something to consider if I want to use a lens but don't
want to buy and own it long term.  It looks like they also do camera
rentals, but I'm pretty sure I'd want to own the camera.

20161216/https://www.borrowlenses.com/product/Pentax-K1-Digital-SLR

Okay, so now I'm wondering.  What's the difference between TTL and
p-TTL flash?  Are they compatible?  The short answer is, not really.
TTL flash apparently can be used with DSLR cameras under some
conditions, it's just that the TTL technique of detecting light
reflected off of the sensor to determine when to cut off the flash
doesn't work very well compared to film.  The digital sensor just
doesn't have the right reflectivity.  p-TTL works by sending out a
pre-flash and using that to adjust image exposure.

20161216/http://www.pentaxforums.com/forums/6-pentax-dslr-discussion/99153-difference-between-ttl-p-ttl-flash.html

So, flash unit compatibility is more complicated than you first
thought.

Okay, let's see if the K-5's manual looks more promising in the
technical specifications.

20161218/http://www.ricoh-imaging.co.jp/english/support/man-pdf/k-5.pdf

Hey, lucky me.  The K-5 manual is written in almost exactly the same
langauge as the K-1 manual is written in.  Thus, I have my hopes high
that if the flash AF200T worked with the K-5, so it will also work
with the K-1.  Indeed, of the limited number of flash units mentioned
in the table, most of them are the same between the two different
manuals.

Oh yeah, and the flash sync speed, you were wondering.  Does it have
to match?  Apparently not.  The K-5 has a sync speed of 1/180 sec.
So, I'm assuming that the sync speed of 1/200 sec. for the K-1 should
also be alright.  I think this must be the fastest sync speed the
camera supports, not the required sync speed of the flash modules.

AF200FG is mentioned many times in the K-5 manual.  Does my historic
manual happen to also mention the AF200FG?  Nope, it doesn't even make
a single mention of that flash unit.

----------

Interesting observations from the older manual.  Motor drive for
automatic multiple exposures?  Digital camera back?  Historically,
these were add-on accessories to the basic camera unit, which was
rather compact.  Nowadays, these shapes and contours are built-into a
single larger camera unit for professional models.  Yeah, you can
understand their motivation.  More space for more engineering design
opportunities.  Also, there are smaller cameras available, but they
are generally not modularly expandable up to the kinds of units you
get built in the larger envelope.  Full-frame cameras, for example.

And hey, the historic operating range?  50 degrees Celsius to -20
degrees Celsius.  That's a lower cold floor than is the case with the
modern K-1 camera!  The K-1 camera has an operating temperature from
-10 degrees Celsius to 40 degrees Celsius.

Then again, well yes, DSLR cameras are more battery intensive than SLR
cameras, and you do need to regulate the temperature that the battery
operates at if you want to be able to take any pictures at all.

Well, this is important, better keep a direct link to the
specifications for fast future reference.

20161221/http://ricoh-imaging.ca/en/products/cameras/K-1/specifications

Oh yeah, and the camera body will weigh 1 kilogram.  Will my tripod be
able to support it?  Just barely.  It has a load capacity of 2.5
pounds.

But, oh my goodness.  Skimming the Wikipedia article on the kilogram
kind of makes me dispair.  We can hardly keep a consistent reference
for the mass unit of one kilogram, so how much harder should we expect
it to keep consistent metrics for a camera?  Apparently, there are too
many different variables at work to be able to account for them all
and buy a new DSLR camera very similar to what you have setup for your
historic vintage 1984 SLR camera.

Oh yeah, and for comparison, the K-5's specification website.

20161221/http://www.ricoh-imaging.co.jp/english/products/k-5/spec.html

It turns out that the K-5 camera barely weighs any less, and the only
dimension that is significantly different is the depth, which is 13 mm
thicker.  Yeah, like 1.3 centimeters.

----------

So now you're asking.  How did the Pentax brand originate?  Oh, yeah,
I know this.  Okay, I want to go back to review the Wikipedia article
then and see what Wikipedia has to say about the recent history of the
Pentax brand.

20161216/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pentax

Oh yeah, and what about Kiron?  They were an third-party camera lens
manufacturer, who no longer exists.  They never produced "economy"
lenses, and the lenses were always manufactured in Japan.  There you
go.  You've got some pretty impressive optical equipment right there.
But, the company has since disbanded and no longer exist.

20161216/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kiron_Lenses

Oh, and I might as well see if the Pentax camera Wikipedia article
makes any comment as to the Pentax line of cameras having remarkable
compatibility.  Well, unfortunately, it doesn't.

20161216/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pentax_cameras
