---
layout: post
title: "Interesting resources on book scanning, and 3D scan the world"
date: 2016-02-03 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [3d-scanning, 3d-scanner, pentax-k-1-camera]
tags: [3d-scanning, 3d-scanner, pentax-k-1-camera]
---

Really interesting resources on book scanning.  It also covers some 3D
scanning techniques as how they relate to 3D scanning.

20161203/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_scanning  
20161203/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:MyBookScanner,June12,2011.JPG  
20161203/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planetary_scanner

Ha, that's a really interesting way to put things.  Build a high speed
book scanner from trash.

20161203/http://www.instructables.com/id/DIY-High-Speed-Book-Scanner-from-Trash-and-Cheap-C/  
20161203/https://www.diybookscanner.org/  
20161203/https://www.diybookscanner.org/intro.html  
20161203/https://www.diybookscanner.org/forum/viewtopic.php?f=17&t=788

<!-- more -->

So, what does this have to do with 3D scanning?  Turn a 3D scan of an
object into a book!  Then you can scan the corresponding output and
store it in the same kinds of file formats (PDF) that are used to
store scanned books.  Cool.  This has important implications for 3D
data longevity.  The advantage with books is that they can be readily
understood by humans without the use of any specialized tools to read
them, unlike the case for richer forms of media.  Also, for the case
of microfiche/microfilm, this can be readily understood with the aid
of magnification optics, which are obvious, simple, and
straightforward, so again, this kind of media is resistant to
obsolescence.  Finally, being able to bring these forward perfectly by
extension into PDF brings the power of yet another technology that is
resistance to obsolescence due to its sheer popularity and de facto
standard adoption.

Interesting, though less related:

20161203/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institutional_repository

----------

I've found an interesting article about 3D scanning the world.  Yeah,
it's totally what you were getting at.  You're not alone, there are
people who share the same mindset as you.  It's just that there are
not many of them.  Yeah, and I must admit, I guess that's what makes
us all kind of geeky.  Being a little bit too forward-looking about
what technology can do but is not doing in the present.

20161203/http://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/robotics-software/its-time-to-start-3d-scanning-the-world

----------

So, anyways, I was wondering.  Where was that IEEE Spectrum online
article about open-source tools possibly being used for counterfeiting
objects through 3D scanning and 3D printing?  I can't seem to find it,
I give up.  I'd have to actually read the magazine contents one at a
time to find it.  But, in the meantime, this is the closest I came to
what I was looking for.

20161204/DuckDuckGo ieee spectrum open source 3d scanning tools counterfeiting
20161204/http://standardsinsight.com/tech-ethics/3d-printing-ieee-standards-to-address-counterfeiting
