---
layout: post
title: "What I don't like about cultures without a maintenance habit"
date: 2017-04-19 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [misc, reiterate]
tags: [misc, reiterate]
---

* Fixing broken windows, computer security.  Code habits.

You know what?  I have been kind of disappointed the way management
works at work.  You know, it is always like we're trying to work on a
new project to make things so much bigger and faster, but we don't
really have culture that goes back and revisits past work that we've
done and try to improve it.  I think this is especially important in
the case of past work that is still being used in an active production
process.

Yeah, seriously, on my own time, I have very much developed the idea
of practical organizational habits.  Again, I reiterate, because this
is important!  How do you avoid wasting time organizing something that
is short lived and will be deleted soon?  Easy, you just allocate a
fixed time schedule to organize the collection a little bit at a time.
What will happen over long periods of time is that long-lived
information will end up being very well organized, and short-lived
information will only be partly organized before it gets deleted.

<!-- more -->

But seriously, how do I feel about the practice as is being done at
work?  I feel like this fits in with the "fixing broken windows"
criminology theory.  As the theory goes, the idea is that if you spend
time to fix broken windows in an abandoned building, then it is less
likely to become a criminal organization's crime center, but it you
leave it be with broken windows, more people will come and vandalize
the structure until it finally collapses.  I feel like a similar thing
is going on with our imperfect infrastructure.  The fact that it is
imperfect tends to cause more things to break whenever we try to
service or maintain it, and likely this problem is just going to keep
getting worse until the system finally collapses.

But do you know what is really interesting about this analysis?  Think
about how this applies to mass market software.  All the vendors are
competing to add maximum features to increase productivity, right?
But what about the security of the code?  Well, a similar thing is
actually going on here.  One by one little security vulnerabilities
pile up in the code.  The development team would very clearly notice
most of these vulnerabilities had only they've been allocated some
time to examine the code for them, but do they have the time?  Nope,
management busies them up so that they can't even think about that.
But anyways, being a fairly public product, criminal passer-bys go and
look at this seemingly dilapidated building, and they say, "Oh, there
is this vulnerability here, and that vulnerability there.  Why don't I
take advantage of them?"  And then once the criminals really get
started with their illegal businesses, a criminal economy starts to
thrive around the product, and everyone else is affected by the chaos.

And guess what?  The simple idea of management to implement a "fixing
broken windows" project would have been an easy way to steer clear of
this issue.

----------

As I have stated just below, there is this thing that I dub "the
tourism effect."  And actually, when you think about it, this exact
same problem applies to software and innovation.  The extreme
innovators want to keep breaking new ground and churning out
half-baked solutions.  Yet computers must be programmed with great
degrees of precision if they are to be expected to deliver highly
precise results, and highly precise results are required for highly
secure operations of computer systems.  For companies that define
themself to be in the boat of constant innovators, one has to expect
that from such companies comes software full of security holes and
vulnerabilities.

So anyways, that's the real background on the lack of the "fixing
broken windows" cultural practice at high-tech companies.  Yep, the
root of the problem comes from the same human psychology that causes
innovation, just as has been pointed out in _The Design of Everyday
Things_ book.  Again, I reiterate, because this is important!
