---
layout: post
title: Inventory system, 3D scanning, and Google Street View
date: 2017-04-20 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [3d-scanning, 3d-scanner, inven-sys]
tags: [3d-scanning, 3d-scanner, inven-sys]
---

Much of the technology of your inventory system shares in common with
Google Street View.  Yes, like you were saying earlier.  Again, I
reiterate, because this is important!  It turns out that Google Street
View is a much more familiar computer application than video games.
Why is that?  Well, because Google Street View has some important
business application uses, but video games are "opt-in."  That is,
playing video games is optional, but the kinds of conditions that may
prompt people to use Google Street View are much more "mandatory" in
nature.  You've got to get to this area that you are unfamiliar with
for some political purpose of some important event that you are to
attend, but you've never been there before.  How does the place even
look like?  How do you know you've actually reached the right place?
Well, it's Google Street View to the rescue!

* Google Street View is the biggest video game of them all.

    * It is more familiar than most video games, mostly because it
      seamlessly integrates with a business function.

<!-- more -->

So yes, you've probably seen many of your family members use Google
Street View.  You've also probably noticed that they don't just _use_
Google Street View for their business purpose, but they actually play
around with it in a more entertainment sense.  Yes, like a video game.
So it turns out that from a technical standpoint, in terms of
familiarizing people with a particular technology, those technologies
that have a business use are far better than video games in spreading
familiarity and awareness with using a technology.  Or in other words,
the best video game of them all is the non-video game application use
of a particular technology.

Okay, now time for some commentary on the range of applications of
your 3D scanner project.  Again, I reiterate, because this is
important!  Like you were saying earlier, for the most part, the
market is already saturated when it comes to 3D scanning.  Everyone
who could want to do 3D scanning already is doing 3D scanning, and
decreasing the price of the 3D scanner will not increase the share of
the market.  (Except for me, that is!)

But really, why is this?  Why is it that individual computer users
have no interest in 3D scanning?

The answer, as it turns out, can be found from the phenomena of
tourism.  Yes, like I have heard other people say, they are interested
in exploring entirely new places like some important cities in a new
state (of the United States), but when it comes to revisiting the same
place in greater detail, like exploring more cities in the same state,
that get boring.  If something is boring and someone is doing things
on their own time, and the task is not required, they're not going to
do it, are they?  I don't think so.  So it turns out that the same
concept can be applied when it comes to environmental mapping and 3D
scanning.  People want to see Google Street View so that they can get
an idea of what the new place looks like, but they don't care for
extensive 3D scans of that place once they are already familiar.  It
also seems that there is agreement on this phenomena for personal
spaces that people live in.  Yes, strangely enough, most people are
not interested in fully understanding their immediate physical
surroundings.  Rather, they invoke the least amount of effort that it
takes to do what they want, and like I said, they don't want a full
understanding of their immediate 3D surroundings.

So there you go.  For private spaces like inside homes and company
buildings, where Google cannot and will not go without permission of
the owner, we'll never get detailed pictures of them in the computer.
In both cases, it is because the owner of the space in question both
doesn't want to pay for the service and doesn't want an untrusted
visitor inside the space.  Also, the owner will not scan the space
themself simply because they are unfamiliar with the technology of 3D
scanning, and most businesses and individuals are not very high-tech
and eager to learn about what the latest technologies have to offer
them in terms of increased productivity.  Nope, they still want to
keep doing things in the same-old, less productive manner, simply
because it is more familiar and they don't want to learn a new thing
when their old thing seems to work reasonably well.

There you go.  "Reasonably well" for most people may be "poor" for
you.  And yes you've already emphasized this point many times before.
Again, I reiterate, because this is important!  It turns out that most
people have very little care for doing things precisely.  Yet for the
few people and businesses that really place an emphasis on precision,
the results that come from these people and businesses will be
considered unsatisfactory.  It's only when regulations mandate a
precise business process will people universally deliver on precision.
Except under those circumstances, non-standard processes have to be
considered the norm, under which there will be a great diversity
between the best processes and the worst processes.
