---
layout: post
title: Distracting black lines, Rockettes discrimination, history of asylum
date: 2017-02-22 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [random, tour-de-force]
tags: [random, tour-de-force]
---

Distracting black lines?  So what was that thing about "the concept is
simple, black lines distract"?  Oh, I think I may have found it.

20170222/DuckDuckGo the black lines distract  
20170222/http://whitelines.se/function/

Aw, patented so they say.  Yeah, sure, but I have my own criticisms
against the mechanism.  First of all, the existing design of using
light blue pre-printed lines on paper is in fact designed for minimal
visibility.  Second, I think that although this may seem to be a good
idea for young college students for _writing_, it may be a little bit
more difficult for older people to use than the mainstream design.
Reading the paper, though, sure that may be easier for everyone.  So
yeah, they got their marketing demographics right for their paper,
sure.

Oh, what's this?  More interesting things.  So, to add to _Tour de
Force_, often times its important to be aware of the social conditions
going on at historic times, not just the state-of-the-art of the
technology, because that decides who and what kinds of people got the
mass majority of historic access to the technology, which is often
times only a restricted group, and because culture advances slower
than technology, often times those arbitrary preferences and
discriminations can continue on even in the present day.  So, this is
one of the historic discriminations that were going on in a
technology-inspired named center, Radio City Music Hall.

<!-- more -->

20170222/http://www.nytimes.com/1987/12/26/nyregion/rockettes-and-race-barrier-slips.html

So, what does Wikipedia have to say about "asylum"?  Oh, quite some
interesting things.  So, basically the idea of political asylum came
out of the unfortunate historic fact that sometimes, people not in
political or cultural agreement would get sent to mental institutions,
and mental institutions possess a variety of punishment that is not
found in other medical practices.  So how can they escape from this?
Well, they can be granted political asylum in a different country,
protected from the abuses of the mental asylums in other countries.

20170223/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asylum  
20170223/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_psychiatric_institutions  
20170223/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Right_of_asylum
