---
layout: post
title: "More searching on the Caffenol organic film developing
        process, and more info on materials and technology of film in
        general"
date: 2017-08-16 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [pentax-k-1-camera, toy-camera]
tags: [pentax-k-1-camera, toy-camera]
---

More searching on the Caffenol organic film developing process.  So,
comments?

* First of all, a lot of people prefer the developing process because
  you don't have to work with smelly chemicals.  Or, chemicals that
  smell bad.

* Second, how do you remove the tannin for better results?  Well, my
  search results weren't very informative, but preliminary evidence
  suggests that you should use some sort of filter system to remove
  it.  Perhaps one designed to _extract_ the tannin would be most
  useful for getting all the other chemicals on one side.

20170816/DuckDuckGo remove tannin from coffee  
20170816/http://www.waterdoctorjcgalloway.com/tannins-in-water.html  
20170816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tannin  
20170816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caffenol  
20170816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caffeic_acid

Ah yes!  This link has some example photos.  Remember, this is a
black-and-white development process only.  If you use color film, you
will get black-and-white results.

20170816/https://web.archive.org/web/20120426041955/http://filmphotographyproject.com/content/2011/01/coffee-break-â€“-develop-film-home-caffenol  
20170816/http://www.caffenol.org/

<!-- more -->

That Caffenol site has a lot of information.  You can even develop
photographic film using beer.  So, maybe it does have the answer for
better results.  But sure, remember that you won't get the sharpest
and best photographic results using these alternative development
processes, but they sure are a good choice for a toy camera!

----------

So where is a _comprehensive_ list of photosenitive materials that can
be used for photographic film?  Well, I hadn't had much luck on
searching for this, so I'll have to pick this up later.  But, an
important point on film and developing.  If you take super-long
exposures, you don't need to develop film.  The image will be visible
without developing if it is exposed for a very long time.  However,
creating a latent image that is not visible and then using a
developing agent to make it visible enables much faster photography.
Color film is made in several layers using filters to adjust the
sensitivity of each layer.  In other words, it is more complicated
than what you might want for hobbyist DIY photography.

* So there you go.  Now you know what a developing agent is really
  used for.

* And the fixing agent?  It is used to remove the silver halide from
  the film and leave behind only the dying agent.

* As far as this Wikipedia article goes, it seems that silver halide
  is really the only practical photosensitive material for consumer
  photography.  No wonder why film is so expensive.  So I guess the
  only other place to go is the alternative photography Wikipedia
  article.

** All the non-silver processes are called _alternative process_.
   There you go.

* However, it looks like the silver halide can be reused after it is
  removed from the film, if you have your own film coating machine.

* The typical film stock back is _plastic_ (cellulose acetate).

20170816/DuckDuckGo photo film coating materials  
20170816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photographic_film  

Is fixing required for black and white film development?  Yes.

20170816/DuckDuckGo black and white film development  
20170816/http://www.wikihow.com/Develop-Black-and-White-Film

Infrared film?  Is that about as easy to develop as black-and-white
film?  Yes.  However, buying it, handling it, and setting up the
camera to shoot with it is more difficult.  You need a filter to shoot
in infrared, and you might need to load and unload the film in
complete darkness.  Oh, and many historic commercial production
sources have discontinued their lines.

20170816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrared_photography

----------

More on alternative processes?  Unfortunately, it seems that most
alternative processes that do not require silver halide rely on an
ultraviolet light source, which is an inconvenience.

20170816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gum_bichromate  
20170816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lumi_(company)

But wait!  There are those links to the external sites for learning
more about alternative processes.  Alas, they don't look very
promising.

But this Wikipedia article does.  This provides a much more
complete listing.

20170816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_photographic_processes

20170816/DuckDuckGo non-silver photosensitive coating  
20170816/https://www.google.com/patents/US3578456  
20170816/https://www.google.com/patents/US3904419  
20170816/https://www.google.com/patents/US3775123

So, there were actually a lot of interesting patents filed for
non-silver photosensitive materials.  Unfortunately, none of them
really came to fruitition on the commercial mass market.  I'm
suspecting that the failure happened due to lack of marketing and
difficulty in getting the produced films onto physical store shelves.

20170816/DuckDuckGo black and white film non-silver  
20160816/DuckDuckGo naturally occurring photographic film  
20160816/http://www.silver-refiner.com/photographic-film-recycling.html

This is interesting.  Silver doesn't have many negative effects on
humans, and in fact the human body is designed to filter out silver
that comes in one's diet naturally.  However, the most severe negative
effect on humans is permanent bluing of the skin from long-term
exposure to silver dust.

Nearly half of all artificial silver emissions into the environment
come from the photographic industry.  The availability of small
developing machines inside of retail outlets has increased the amount
of silver released into the environment.

20160816/http://www.dartmouth.edu/~toxmetal/toxic-metals/more-metals/silver-faq.html

Silver nitrate is an early photographic film material, but it is not
as photosensitive as silver halide.

20160816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silver_nitrate

So is this where I can find a more comprehensive list of
photosensitive chemicals?  Maybe.

20160816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Photographic_chemicals

Maybe this is it?  No.

20170816/

Almost every imaginable historic photographic process uses silver.
Why, I might as well say that the daguerreotype photographic process
was merely discovered as a freak accident in mirror manufacturing.

20160816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kallitype  
20160816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calotype  
20160816/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tintype

Failed search.

20170816/DuckDuckGo photo sensitive material change  
20170816/DuckDuckGo selective dye fading photography

Anyways, good idea, use some sort of dye fading at a small scale to
create your latent image, then use a developing agent to amplify that
effect.
