---
layout: post
title: "More on GPIO port expanders, level shifters, AstroPrint, and
        RACHEL"
date: 2017-03-06 21:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi]
tags: [raspberry-pi]
---

Okay, I am undeterred.  Where is a good port expander I can get for
the Raspberry Pi?  Where is a good level shifter I can get for the
Raspberry Pi?  Interestingly enough, both of these and the necessary
instructions are found at easy on AdaFruit.  I guess that is the place
to go if you want to go shopping for electronic parts to use in
conjunction with a Raspberry Pi or an Arduino.

20170306/DuckDuckGo gpio port expander  
20170306/https://www.raspberrypi.org/forums/viewtopic.php?f=29&t=113751  
20170306/https://learn.adafruit.com/mcp230xx-gpio-expander-on-the-raspberry-pi/overview  
20170306/DuckDuckGo raspberry pi level shifter

"4-channel I2C-safe Bi-directional Logic Level Converter - BSS138"

20170306/https://www.adafruit.com/products/757  
20170306/http://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/127606/simplest-uni-directional-level-shifter-3-3v-5v

Never fear, Raspberry Pi Zero has I2C.

20170306/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspberry_Pi

<!-- more -->

Oh, goodie!  Good news, we have progress in the development of libre
firmware for the Raspberry Pi!  However, note again, as usual, that
the libre firmware at present only provides limited functionality.
And, it has lots of issues at present and not very much testing, as is
noted.

* You know, about H.264 and WebM.  I think often times, when the
  corporations realize that a third party ends up going through all
  kinds of hard work to develop a libre solution, after a point in
  time, they end up promising not to sue the libre party.  It's kind
  of like you need a neutral ambassador to cool the war matters.

20170306/https://github.com/christinaa/rpi-open-firmware  
20170306/https://github.com/christinaa/rpi-open-firmware/issues/31

And the Wikipedia article makes mention of AstroPrint?  Wow, I never
heard of them.  Well, they're new on the scene, they came to try to
make 3D printing easy and portable for consumers.  They've got a
pretty interesting article on Medium.

20170306/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AstroPrint  
20170306/https://medium.com/@AstroPrint/what-would-it-take-for-your-grandma-to-buy-a-3d-printer-1e214ffc1b0  
20170306/https://trends.google.com/trends/explore#q=3d%20printing

Inspiring uses of 3D printing?  Unfortunately, after having looked
through all of these, I haven't found anything particularly novel.
Nope, just everything that I'd expect from 3D printing.  Oh, now you
point out to me.  They said _inspiring_, which I shouldn't
misinterpret as novel or revolutionary.  Nope, it's about a more
artistic sense and point of view.

20170306/https://blogs.adobe.com/creativecloud/30-inspiring-examples-of-3d-printing/

A research paper that says, somewhere in there, that the Raspberry Pi
is popular in home automation because of the lower cost over
commercial solutions.

20170306/http://www.ijcsmc.com/docs/papers/May2015/V4I5201599a70.pdf

"RACHEL"?  What's that?

20170306/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RACHEL

Oh, now this totally gets to me.  You know your short blip thought
about Haiti?  The poorest nation in the world, people are starving to
death over there, and someone has said that they think it is more
important to send money over there than it is to support local
communities.  Now, I know that is actually a bit further from the
truth.  Okay, here's the thing.  First of all, let's understand this
point.  Why is Haiti doing so bad?  Well, the historic reason was due
to the French colonization followed by their rapid pull-out.  That
kind of left the nation in a state of ruin as to many things.  They
tried farming to get food, but they over-farmed the land and depleted
its nutrient value.

One thing to be especially aware of in the case of indigenous
communities is that money alone is often stated as "one of the biggest
lies to them."  Indeed, what makes communities do well is often more
than just money.  In some sense, paying for all of a nation's food is
like setting up a welfare state where you are paying for a person's
food who does not have a job.  It doesn't work in the long run in
making the person able to get out of the condition of lack of economic
dependence, and so the same it is with nations.  One thing with
agriculture is that it is a highly localized practice.  Agricultural
techniques that work well in one region of the world are not always
transferable to work well in other regions of the world, due to
differences in whether a climate is arid or dry.  Cultural
revitalization is also a very important part in bringing local
communities back to good functioning and keeping them there.  So the
same could be said about your local community too.  So the consensus?
Well, it sounds like you need to support both communities.  A limited
amount of financial support to remote communities, and good
traditional support of local communities.

I guess here in lies the particular technicality.  It's likely that
the most beneficial way to support local communities is not the
donation of money, but the volunteering of useful and important
cultural and practical resources, whereas for remote communities, due
to practical technicalities, your support to them may come mainly
through limited donations of money, and conditions allowing, other
remote-transferable resources such as non-perishable food.

Note that in the case of areas of poverty, it's important to remember
that the emphasis is on the indigenous population.  As far as a
non-indigenous population is concerned, they can just move out of the
area if it is not a good area.

Okay, so that was a long rant so it seemed, so what does this have to
do with RACHEL?  Well, the problem at hand is that the digital world
and the definition of "education" encapsulated therein is a highly
limited one, one that is not likely to provide the correct kind of
educational coverage that is required in developing countries.  If
your goal is to learn about technology, sure, go ahead full force with
RACHEL, but the "cultural material"?  That is likely to be considered
"junk" for the native communities.

Oops, sorry.  I guess I just invalidated the purpose of keeping
Project Gutenberg on your local computer, at least until the case when
you can get Project Gutenberg to be representative of the information
of most local communities in the world.  Until then, it is best to
abide by my recommendation of transforming computers into creativity
machines to gather cultural knowledge.

Oh yeah, medical information, that may be a little bit useful, but
again, the same problem applies here as it does in the case of
cultural knowledge.  The problem is that the medical knowledge in the
database may be mostly relevant to people of other ethnicities and
there may not be sufficient medical information as is pertinent to the
local people.  However, I must note that this case is not nearly as
bad as it is with the case of cultural knowledge.

Still, for me personally, this is interesting, from a U.S.-centric
education viewpoint.

20170306/https://racheloffline.org/  
20170306/https://racheloffline.org/collections/rachel  
20170306/http://worldpossible.org/docs/wp/RACHEL_LiberiaReport.pdf

Also, that Liberia Report is very interesting.  One of the main
caveats of the study is that the experimental group did not get the
level of regular access to the computers that the researchers were
hoping for, so the measured gains from the study turned out to be
lower than should probably be the case.

Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the study is comparing the
recent history of Liberia to that of the United States.  There has
been a civil war in Liberia ending in the year 2003, and most students
and teachers were negatively affected by the war conditions and had
shared experiences.  They had to be in hiding during the time, thus no
schooling.  Another thing that happened was the Ebola outbreak crisis,
which forced students to suspend school.  Yeah, these have some
serious negative effects on the students that have set their education
behind that of their American counterparts.  It also highlights how
important the stable environment of the United States is for
professional development.

Oh, another interesting part of the study was that the students have
never had experience taking a "Strongly agree"..."Storngly disagree"
survey before, so they ended up doing it wrong, thinking that there
was right and wrong answers and trying to answer the correct answer.
Yeah, now that I think about it, that might be something very
particular to American education that is not very frequently
encountered in education elsewhere in the world.

Anyways, it looks like KA-Lite is some pretty good educational
material, much better than the "educational games" of time past that I
have seen on computing platforms.

Oh yeah, another interesting website that I looked at.  So there you
go, traditional stories in modern technology.

20170306/http://www.africanstorybook.org/
