---
layout: post
title: Reflections on 3D technology
date: 2017-05-03 21:30 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [3d-scanning, 3d-scanner, 3d-printing, media-prog]
tags: [3d-scanning, 3d-scanner, 3d-printing, media-prog]
---

* 3D scanning?  Where are your applications in a post-industrialized
  society.  Medical profession.  Because we know, employment and
  economics in that sector roughly tracks that of the human
  population, which is known to always be growing.

* Come on!  3D software can't interoperate?  That is terrible.  So why
  is it not terrible in the case of human natural languages?  Well,
  that's because language communication happens at human speeds, and
  relatively speaking, it is fast and easy for humans to learn new
  languages, hence it is not seen as of critical as a problem.  But in
  the case of computers, everything has ought to be operating on
  superspeed.  So, even the minor delay by having two computer
  graphics software unable to interoperate with each other and
  bringing in an engineer to reverse engineer the two file formats so
  as to implement a format converter is an unacceptable delay and
  expenditure.

  It renders for a user experience at a double F minus.

* 3D graphics photo compression.  Animations, we can't really do, but
  still photos we can.  You're right.  That's totally correct, when
  you think about the whole pipeline.  The lack of quality in animated
  motions, the computational expense, and the relatively small number
  of still photos.  It all makes sense from a technological
  standpoint.

  So basically, you're saying you can setup 3D time-lapse stills
  first, and then add in the animation later.  Also, an audio slide
  show with the 3D rendered stills also works quite well.

<!-- more -->

* Again, I reiterate, because this is important!  After all these
  technological advancements in bringing computer hardware to the mass
  market, it has become readily apparent that the education is
  severely lacking in most areas, despite an abundant supply of
  hardware.  The fundamental problem is that education of advanced
  computer systems cannot diffuse as quickly through society as the
  raw hardware itself can.
