---
layout: post
title: Ideas for improving GPLv3 on choosealicense.com
author: quorten
date: 2018-05-29 13:00 -0500
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

The GNU GPLv3 is a copyleft license: anyone who distributes your code
must also provide the source code, and derivative works need to also
provide the modified source code.  Likewise, it provides an express
grant of patent rights from contributors to users.

<!-- more -->

The GNU GPLv3 is a copyleft license designed to assure users they can
work with the source code.  Anyone who distributes your code must also
provide the source code, and derivative works need to also provide the
modified source code.  Likewise, it provides an express grant of
patent rights from contributors to users.

The GNU GPLv3 is a copyleft license: anyone who distributes derivative
works need to also provide the modified source code.  Likewise, it
provides an express grant of patent rights from contributors to users.

The GNU GPLv3 is a copyleft license: anyone who distributes derivative
works is required to also provide the modified source code.
Additionally, it is designed to assure users they can work with the
source code, so reasonable documentation on building and installing
the software from the source code must also be provided.  Likewise, it
provides an express grant of patent rights from contributors to users.

The GNU GPLv3 is a copyleft license: anyone who distributes a
derivative work is required to also provide the modified source code.
Also, it provides an express grant of patent rights from contributors
to users.

Additionally, reasonable documentation for the user to build and
install the software from the source code must also be provided.

FINAL VERSION:

The GNU GPLv3 is a copyleft license: anyone who distributes a
derivative work is required to also provide the modified source code.
Also, it provides an express grant of patent rights from contributors
to users.

SUBMIT IN TWO PARTS.  One with just the cleaned up language, and
another with the factual addition.

VERDICT on the second part: write it in as a term on that
permission/restriction matrix.

ORIGINAL TEXT:

The GNU GPLv3 is a copyleft license that requires anyone who
distributes your code or a derivative work to make the source
available under the same terms, and also provides an express grant of
patent rights from contributors to users.

FINAL VERDICT:

I'll submit no changes, as ultimately the changes to submit are so
superficially similar to the original text that they might as well get
rejected.
