---
layout: post
title: Interesting articles I've found on Hackaday
author: quorten
date: 2018-11-17 18:47 -0600
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

While I was searching for previous information on the Prusa i3, I
found these two interesting articles on Hackaday.

The first one, about the history of the pasteurization of milk.  It's
interesting that I haven't learned about Alice Evans in my previous
schooling.  But, the main point and important point is this Alice
Evans was the key person to study the bacteria found in cow's milk,
trace the link with the bacteria found in goat's milk and the
associated illness that can develop in humans, search for evidence of
a similar medical illness in America, and recommend pasteurization on
_all_ cow's milk, even milk from healthy-looking cows.  Initially,
there was strong opposition and resistance to this switch, largely due
to the cost of the pasteurization equipment and the prospective cost
of having all cow's milk pasteurized.  So, the dairy industry started
by making a compromise.  "Grade A" milk would be unpasteurized milk
taken from healty-looking cows under strict cleanliness standards.
Everything else would be pasteurized.

The story of how the dairy industry switched over to finally
pasteurize Grade A milk too is interesting.  One day the child of a
high-ranking officer in the dairy industry came down with great
illness.  A doctor's examination concluded that the illness was
brucellosis, caused from bacteria in the milk they drank.  Of course
they were only drinking Grade A milk, which was unpasteurized.  This
was the tipping point to change the dairy industry to pasteurize _all_
milk.

20181117/https://hackaday.com/2018/11/13/alice-evans-brucellosis-or-why-we-pasteurize-milk/

Now, a brief summary of this one is interesting.  Automated telephone
switching equipment initially came about to defeat fraud.  But,
ironically, nowadays it is used heavily to commit fraud, via spam
computer dialing.  Part of this is due to the network design
pre-dating the era for the need of strict security measures, other of
it due to government regulations on openness and exchange of the
network not allowing for much to be added in the way of security.

20181117/https://hackaday.com/2018/11/12/hello-and-please-dont-hang-up-the-scourge-of-robocalls/
