---
layout: post
title: Why Internet of Things will not be a commercial revolution
date: 2018-05-15 20:00:00 -0500
author: quorten
categories: []
tags: []
---

Many commentators have touted the Internet of Things as being the next
big revolution in terms of the total number of computers, exceeding
that of the whole body of modern mobile devices today, smartphones and
tablet computers.  That is true.  However, there is an implicit
message contained in such statements that is not true.

It has been understood that smartphones have tremendously eclipsed the
sales of desktops and laptops, not just in number of units sold, but
also in tons of hardware sold annually and annual revenue in
U.S. dollars.  Similarly, people spend enough time accessing the
Internet on mobile devices such that the total network traffic coming
from such devices rivals that of desktops and laptops.  Essentially,
not only do the number of mobile devices eclipse that of desktops and
laptops, but also the revenue and Internet traffic eclipses that of
desktops and laptops.

So, this is where the distinction has to be made.  We know the
computers by the numbers of Internet of Things could easily exceed
that of mobile devices, but what about the money?  Is the Internet of
Things market even that lucrative at all?  For the year 2018, we can
probably safely answer "no."

One of the reasons why smartphones are such a lucrative market is
because they sit very close of the physical person who uses them.
They are always within easy physical reach, so the decision to keep
the device or replace it with a new one is, matter of fact, a
physically easy action.  Smartphones, by their virtue of being
physically small, are also easy to purchase and throw away.  As an
unfortunate consequence, smartphones have a despicably low recycling
rate and are one of the fastest growing waste streams _in the world_.
Why take the extra trip to get to your nearest electronics recycler
when you can just drop a smartphone in the trash right next to you?

The _only_ way for Internet of Things to be as lucrative or more
lucrative than smartphones, in terms of revenue, is to essentially
enter the market of fast-moving consumer packaged staple goods.  That
is not what we are seeing in the year 2018.  Instead, we are seeing
Internet of Things devices predominantly in slower-moving, fixed
infrastructure areas such as routers and IP cameras.  Especially,
consider the case of IP cameras.  IP cameras are located in physically
difficult to access places like on high edges of walls, ceilings,
roofs, street lamps, and in the middle of nature preserves.  These
devices are not going to be replaced on a whim, simply due to the
labor needed to replace such devices.  Also, where's the motivation to
replace the device if it is not immediately in your hand?  So, even
though Internet of Things network traffic may continue to grow to
eclipse that of modern smartphones, chances are very slim that the
revenue of Internet of Things will exceed that of smartphones, unless
Internet of Things (IoT) devices can make inroads into faster-moving
consumer goods.

If every shoe, sock, shirt, water bottle, and food package contained
an embedded IoT computer, maybe.  However, consumer adoption of such
smart devices hasn't been very strong in the present day, so greater
adoption would likely only happen if the manufacturers somehow
"forced" the decision by citing other technical requirements or
advantages as to why an embedded computer must be included.  Yet, even
this is hard: In the case of the food industry, profit margins are
already very thin, such that many attempts to introduce more high-tech
systems have failed due to marginally running over cost limits, which
multiplied into bankruptcy-inducing losses.  Also, smart water bottles
have, at best, been laughed off as unnecessary by most people.  So,
suffice it to say, it's unclear if Internet of Things can become
commercially lucrative, although we know for sure that it will
continue to grow in devices and network traffic generated.
