---
layout: post
title: Random articles discovered during Raspberry Pi research
date: 2018-12-31 21:20 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

These are some random interesting articles I discovered during
Raspberry Pi research.

Boeing, why is the company called Boeing?  It's because it was founded
by William Boeing.  Indeed, the goal of the company early on was to
focus on building airplanes.  There's quite an interesting history
section on this blog article, and you can clearly see the visual
difference between the early, obsolescent not-so-well designed
aircraft and the rapid progression to fully modern aviation, not just
in terms of technology, but also in terms of _style_ in the practice
of running the businesses involved, and the purposes of the technology
being used.

20181228/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boeing

20,000 feet you ask?  Why does that number just feature in my head
automatically when thinking about the "cool aviation of drones"?
"Drone flying high, at 20,000 feet."  Well, let's see.  What does
Wikipedia have to say about this specifically.  Not much,
unfortunately.  That being said, I guess the Boeing article reference
to the first passenger airplane to fly at 20,000 feet with a pressurized
cabin is by far the best source you can come by.

20181228/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nightmare_at_20,000_Feet

This is a pretty interesting article reflecting on the history of Doom
over the past 25 years, and how even the original game engine is still
massively popular today.  Often times one of the developing software
to target miscellaneous computer hardware is "Does it run Doom?"  Oh,
and there was also an interesting mention of playing Doom on an ATM.

<!-- more -->

20181229/https://hackaday.com/2018/12/28/doom-retrospective-25-years-of-metal/  
20181229/https://hackaday.com/2014/07/26/playing-doom-on-an-atm/

This is an interesting Hackaday article with a really interesting
graph of the news hype cycle when it reviews tech, with a particular
focus on the developing negative connotation of drones.  It then has a
critical discussion about the ambiguity and inaccuracy of the
investigation, and a call to the hacker community to take an active
role defending proper critical scrutiny of the mainstream mediaso that
poor evidence such as the published mainstream news articles on the
subject aren't taken as ground truth when considering passing a new
restrictive law on drones.

20181231/https://hackaday.com/2018/12/26/ooops-did-we-just-close-an-airport-over-a-ufo-sighting/

20181231/https://hackaday.com/2018/12/24/oh-the-lessons-youll-learn-by-building-a-robot-familiar/

Very interesting 2018 year in review article here on Hackaday.  My
favorites: the commentary on single-board computers releases/sales
going down, the end of the C.H.I.P single-board computer, RISC-V
gaining momentum, and GPGPU prices down due to lower Bitcoin demand,
and the Bitcoin market value crash that looks like it's here to stay.
Indeed, I must comment that the end of the C.H.I.P single-board
computer sure is sad.  I was really excited learning about it, being a
first and cheapest of its kind, especially when I was having trouble
buying a Raspberry Pi Zero board of my own.  Alas, I must personally
admit, once I finally got my Raspberry Pi Zero, well, that was
basically the end of me thinking about the C.H.I.P for a long time.
But, I liked the mention of a mini Apple IIe computer emulator with
authentic 3D printed case as one of the editor's favorite C.H.I.P
projects.

20181231/https://hackaday.com/2018/12/27/2018-as-the-hardware-world-turns/  
20181231/https://hackaday.com/2018/04/03/is-this-the-end-for-the-c-h-i-p/  
20181231/https://hackaday.com/2017/06/13/the-mini-apple-iie-that-runs-on-c-h-i-p/
