---
layout: post
title: Updates on the Free Software Foundation
author: quorten
date: 2018-08-20 19:34 -0500
categories: [random-software]
tags: [random-software]
---

In light of this Android money-making machine...  How is the Free
Software Foundation's website doing?  Are they staying up-to-date on
this news.  Now this brings memory back to me.  How often have I been
visiting the Free Software Foundation's websites?  I've visited
`fsf.org` a number of times recently, mainly due to interest over
their Respect Your Freedom Hardware certifications.  But `gnu.org`, I
haven't been visiting that site nearly as much.  Okay, now this is
kind of interesting, then.  Why don't I go visit `gnu.org` for a spin
at how up-to-date its mention of Android is?

Well, well, a cursory front-page analysis leads you to believe that it
is primarily about desktop-oriented softwere.  Now, I know from closer
detail visits in the past that this is not the full story, but that's
the gist you get from the front page.

<!-- more -->

20180820/https://www.gnu.org/  
20180820/https://www.gnu.org/software/software.html  
20180820/https://www.gnu.org/distros/free-distros.html  
20180820/https://www.gnu.org/distros/common-distros.html  
20180820/https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/android-and-users-freedom.html

Oh, indeed Android and LineageOS are mentioned in the "why not
distros" page, but I see no mention of Replicant on the official front
pages.  Sure if you dig deeper, there is mention of Replicant being
better from the rest, but it is not obvious from a casual first visit.

Ah, and Blag was removed from the endorsed distributions upon the
request of the maintainers, stating that it is no longer being
maintained and they no longer wish to have it listed.

20180820/https://www.fsf.org/  
20180820/https://www.fsf.org/patrons/licensing

----------

But really, I do like the work that the Free Software Foundation is
doing, it's just that I wish the community could grow bigger.  I think
it's important to have a critical eye on the software we're using in
our modern-day world, and the Free Software Foundation is one of the
important contributors to this.  The Electronic Frontier Foundation is
also another important proponent, but incidentally I must admit, they
too seem to have not grown significantly in community size and
activity levels in light of recent events.

One thing I like about the Free Software Foundation is that they are
very down-to-earth in their agenda, compared to some other
initiatives.  For example, the Future of Life Institute.  Artificial
intelligence threatening the future of human society?  That is a
little bit too vague and pie-in-the-sky theoretic computer science for
the time being, and in fact that is the representation of the founder.
But, software freedom by contrast?  Not only is that very concrete,
but you can prove that the issues pointed out by free software
advocates is the lead-up before you get to this artificial
intelligence doomsay.  The first problem is that people are not
understanding how their computers work, even at a basic level: where
is the source code for the software you are using?  Even if you found
it, would you be able to compile and install it into your computer
device exactly the same as the manufacturer has done?  If you've got
this down good, you can move onto the next challenge: what is the
"source code" of machine learning systems?  How do you understand why
a machine learning system made a particular decision?  If you've got
the source code for the software, this next challenge should be easy:
just make sure you save the source source data so that you can
re-train the machine learning in a batch mode and get the same
results.  But if you don't even have any of the source code for the
software involved or don't know where to start, you're really lost.
And things can go downhill from here: what started out as a division
of work becomes a division of power, some parties can cause actions
that negatively affect other parties, but there may be no recourse
running the reverse direction.

Ultimately, I think that much of this, well, lack of community
participation in proportion to the scale of the issues very much has
to do with the issues at hand.  Some people say that the human
lifetime is relatively short compared to the speed of human conscious
thought.  When computers are only used for office work tasks
throughout a day, you can be pretty sure that it is likely that the
computers, when used, capture a lot of human conscious thought.  But
that is not the computer world we live in today.  In today's world,
the means to the end of getting over two billion Android users on
Earth was by squeezing every single possible spare minute of time out
of the humans who use these devices: Check your E-mail when you're
waiting for the subway, when you're walking across the hall, when
you're crossing a busy street, when you're in the driver's seat and
supposed to be driving a car, before you go to bed, and so on and so
on and so forth.  When you bring two billion of these users together,
you end up realizing that they could just as well be much more aimless
and clueless than you would otherwise expect from a population of that
size.  But, that was the means to the end by which Android reached a
population of over two billion.

We've long but passed the boundary of human consciousness.  Suffice it
to say, these Android devices reflect a world that is speeding up so
much that the idea of human conscious thought playing an active role
in today's computing is left behind in the dust.  What software
developers previously understood as "solid," discrete objects in the
minds of computer users are now considered "liquids."  The users no
longer pick and place these old fashioned concepts, they just pick up
a bucket chock full of all of them and carry that around whole.
