---
layout: post
title: Relections on big notes, part II
author: quorten
date: 2018-05-16 20:02:00 -500
categories: [blogging]
tags: [blogging, license]
---

So, more about the size of my notes.  I said I started writing these
in about the year 2010.  That is true, but when I started, I wasn't
writing very much very frequently.  By the year 2012, when I got my
own dedicated GNU/Linux laptop, by means of refurbishing a broken
Windows laptop refused by its original owner, is when things started
to speed up.

But, this also deserves interesting discussion in other dimensions.
By virtue of spending more time in the GNU/Linux system, this is also
the time when I turned more and more toward learning about other
people's existing work, and building upon existing libre software, by
virtue of having access to the source code to study and modify.
Ultimately, what happened is that I spent a lot more time documenting
things already developed by other people and a lot less time
developing my own software from scratch.  In the past, I've spent
considerable amounts of time writing lots of code, and considerable
amounts of time learning about APIs, but not so much time _writing_
about other people's work.

* Footnote: Again, I reiterate, because this is important!  Why didn't
  I spend much time documenting?  Because the documentation I was
  working with earlier on was already so well organized!

Yeah, I did write a lot more code during those times than I typically
do nowadays, even though it ultimately turned out to be a lot of
rework that other people already did once before.  However, sometimes
it is useful to reinvent software already written by other people,
just so that you understand different ways that the older, simpler
version of such software could have been written.  Suffice it to say,
the law of diminishing returns applies here: it is not "useful work"
in the purest sense of the term, but it still does help for smaller
improvements that require much more work input.

But, at the end of the day.  What's to become of that older software
that is essentially rework of already existing work?  So, I've thought
this through carefully, and it seems one thing is clear.  People will
always want more permissively licensed software to build off of, even
if the available body of code might be very small and simple.  Suffice
it to say, when it comes to rework, the most productive way to take
advantage of the results is to simply pick a license that has not
already been picked before, and one that is more permissive than the
past licenses at that.

So, the verdict?  When I bring most of my older code projects into
GitHub, I will place them in the public domain, via either the
Unlicense or CC0.  It is true that not all jurisdictions recognize a
public domain, and that is unfortunate because it means that the best
they can get from a licensing standpoint is a permissive-licensing
scheme.  However, for those jurisdictions that do recognize a public
domain, they get the advantage of the last degree of freedom.

* Footnote: The good thing about blogging: It makes it very easy for
  other people to see where you are in tech learning, so that they can
  pick up on some of the things you've learned too.
