---
layout: post
title: Smartphone versus DSLR, and fisheye lens
author: quorten
date: 2018-08-05 14:00 -0500
categories: [pentax-k-1-camera]
tags: [pentax-k-1-camera]
---

Wide angle, narrow aperture photography.  Smartphone or DSLR?  Is
there really an advantage to the DSLR if you are using small apertures
and wide angles?  As it turns out, there is.  The advantage of using
the DSLR is that by having a physically larger sensor, you can
accumulate more light and therefore get lower noise photos.  Sure,
this might mean that you need to take longer exposure photos, but the
point is that is definitely an option within reach when you have the
larger sensor that can accumulate a larger charge and sample it at a
higher resolution.  With the tiny smartphone sensor, you'll saturate
much sooner, and will have to fare with higher noise photos as a
compromise.  There's also the flip side: if instead you want to shoot
at really high shutter speeds, go for the DSLR over the smartphone.

20180805/DuckDuckGo small aperture wide angle photography smartphone versus dslr  
20180805/https://www.dpreview.com/forums/thread/4132450  
20180805/http://www.digitaltrends.com:80/photography/smartphones-are-great-for-casual-photography-but-here-are-5-areas-where-theyre-still-lacking/

Wow, this is really interesting.  Analog editing controls for
photographic editing?  Yeah, it turns out there are people putting
them to those uses too, not just digital audio workstations.  Of
course, this is pretty expensive though, at $250 - $550.

20180805/https://www.dpreview.com/reviews/review-palette-modular-editing-controls

Now looking for wide angle Pentax lenses.  Are there good choices?
There are, each with its own strengths and weaknesses.  The main
tradeoffs: you can have a smaller aperture lens that is physically
smaller and ligher weight, or you can have the larger aperture lens
that is a heavier weight build.  One caveat that people were
discussing is that these really wide angle lenses may not have
super-sharp focus.  As it turns out, that could just as well be a
problem with some people getting bad copies.  (Alas, these may
apparently be more common with the wide angle lenses, or maybe just
this manufacturing line.)  The other problem is that at such wide
angles, it is very difficult for the autofocus system to pinpoint the
focus right on the dot, but otherwise a careful manual focus
adjustment could bring things to perfection.

<!-- more -->

Finally, last remarks on sharpness.  Some people are commenting that
the sharpness of these ultra-wide angle lenses will not impress by
DSLR standards and may be more in line with the standards of the film
era.  Another note: lots of wide-angle lenses that work well for APS-C
cameras, but not much in the way of the K-1 full frame camera.  Also
note that the 15mm Limited prime lens has some caveats of its own.
However, there is also a 14mm prime lens that appears to be doing a
bit better in comparison.

20180805/DuckDuckGo pentax wide angle  
20180805/https://www.dpreview.com/forums/thread/2950434  
20180805/https://www.bhphotovideo.com/c/product/399853-USA/Pentax_21577_SMCP_DA_12_24mm_f_4_ED.html  
20180805/DuckDuckGo pentax 14mm f2.8  
20180805/https://www.bhphotovideo.com/c/product/330095-USA/Pentax_21510_Super_Wide_Angle_SMCP_DA.html  
20180805/https://www.pentaxforums.com/lensreviews/SMC-Pentax-DA-14mm-F2.8-Lens.html  
20180805/DuckDuckGo pentax 15mm limited  
20180805/https://www.pentaxforums.com/lensreviews/SMC-Pentax-DA-15mm-F4-Limited-Lens.html  
20180805/https://www.dpreview.com/reviews/pentax-15-4-p15  
20180805/DuckDuckGo wide angle k-1 full frame

Old forum posts, but still somewhat insightful.

20180805/https://www.dpreview.com/forums/post/57369338  
20180805/https://www.dpreview.com/forums/post/57369375  
20180805/https://www.dpreview.com/forums/post/57369824  
20180805/https://www.dpreview.com/news/4020837793/pentax-fa-50mm-f1-4-sdm-aw-lens-shipping-in-july-for-1199

Fisheye lens?  180 degree photographs.  Indeed, this is the ideal lens
for tight indoor hallway photography.  Alas, the problem with
projecting a sphere into a subset of the 35mm film frame is that you
loose a lot of resolution compared to panorama shots with a narrower
field of view, longer focal length lens.  Verdict: You need a medium
format DSLR for good results with a fisheye lens.

20180805/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisheye_lens
