---
layout: post
title: Does consuming alcohol really help you recover from a cold?
author: quorten
date: 2018-10-18 11:14 -0500
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Some of my coworkers were talking about drinking a mix of alcohol and
water when you are sick is a cure to any illness.

> 35% Hot Water + 60% Alcohol + 5% Honey will gain victory over cold
> virus.  Note: It is for medicinal purpose, 'Minnesotan Fight Against
> Cold', not recommended for habitual action

Is this really true?  At face value, we know that alchohol can kill
germs when it is used outside of the human body.  But what exactly is
the internal effect?  As it turns out, internally alcohol weakens the
immune system and is also causes dehydration.  Not to mention it also
has the typical observed mental effect of making people a little bit
"tipsy" or "drunk."

<!-- more -->

Also, some cold medications have alcohol in them.  The main purpose of
this ingredient is indeed as a sedative, a means to help people wish
their pain away, but it doesn't help cure the illness.  It's very
important that cold medication and alcohol are not taken together,
because such can be a dangerous unregulated mix.  So, it's either one,
or the other, but not both.

The best solution to a cold, without the use of pseudoscience: drink
plenty of clear water to keep yourself hydrated, get plenty of rest,
and relax: don't get too stressed out.  Exercise is a preventative
measure as it helps you be more relaxed, and it also strengthens your
immune system.  Avoid drinking caffeine sources such as coffee because
it also causes dehydration.

20181018/DuckDuckGo does alcohol fight cold viruses  
20181018/https://www.livestrong.com/article/449294-should-you-drink-alcohol-with-a-cold/  
20181018/https://www.webmd.com/cold-and-flu/what-makes-colds-worse
