---
layout: post
title: "Reflections on the lack of popularity of DSLR cameras and 3D
        printers"
author: quorten
date: 2018-06-13 11:!3 -500
categories: [pentax-k-1-camera, 3d-scanning, 3d-scanner, 3d-printing]
tags: [pentax-k-1-camera, 3d-scanning, 3d-scanner, 3d-printing]
---

On the popularity of DSLR cameras.  Why they are not very popular?
First of all, let's analyze what kinds of devices a typical person
uses _most of the time_.  Computers?  Yes, definitely.  But in the
case of the smartphone, they are using the _screen_ most of the time,
not so much the camera.  So there you have it.  You know which of
those two devices an average user is willing to put more money into.
Hence the tiny cheap smartphone cameras are good enough for most
people, no need for the glorious huge SLR camera lenses and sensors.

And the other thing?  Why are 3D printers more popular than 3D
scanners?  Well, a similar reason is going on here too.  Lots of
people spend lots of time at a computer, but how much time are they
spending building real-world objects in the physical world with their
own hands?  There you have it.  We now know the mentality of the major
user.  The purpose of a 3D printer is to readily integrate with the
exist built-world inside the computer, not the other way around.  As
it turns out, the thought process runs in only one direction.  Sorry,
no two-way communication going on here.

So, as you may have figured, the 3D scanners are out of the business
too.  But this raises yet another important question.  What about the
3D printed objects?  What is to become of those if the people in
question don't really spend much time or care in the physical world
compared to the digital world?  Well, go figure.  The 3D printed
objects will eventually become neglected and forgotten.  The user will
loose interest in them much faster than they loose interest in their
computer device.  So, there's another point in hand here.  3D
printing, for most people, is only useful for frequently used tools.
Like, a _smartphone mount_, as we know the user by definition will be
spending a lot of time on their smartphone.


    The reasonable man adapts himself to the world: the unreasonable
    one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore
    all progress depends on the unreasonable man.

-- _Maxims for Revolutionists (1903)_, George Bernard Shaw

20180613/https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/George_Bernard_Shaw

Indeed, this is very distinctively the truth when it comes to the
reality we observe in consumer merchandise and products.  Most people
don't care so much about observing the world as it currently is as
they care about.

And indeed, it could also be interpreted as this in practice: most
"consumers" are, in fact, unreasonable.
