---
layout: post
title: Lego train motors and Lego train history
author: quorten
date: 2018-12-12 20:30 -0600
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Ah, there's a Wikipedia article on Lego trains, and indeed it is very
helpful for understanding the broader picture of the history of Lego
trains.  What I saw happening with the 9 volt series Lego train
components was just the tip of the ice berg.  So, let take what I read
about the bigger picture history and explain it from my perspective.

The earlier Lego trains were designed to be very similar to the
established model train systems.  Matter of fact, Lego train tracks
are only slightly wider than the model train O-gauge rails, probaly
mainly due to the need to make the tracks an integer number of studs
wide.  The earliest Lego train motors in 1966 were battery powered.
Later on in 1969, 12-volt rail-powered motors came into the scene.
Around this time, Lego trains had fairly sophisticated remote track
control features, similar to those found in the established model
train system.

But then, in 1991, when the 9-volt Lego train system came along, the
Lego trains line saw a slowdown in sophistication.  The remote control
panels for track switching and multiple train control were done away
with.  The motivation for moving to 9-volt motors was mainly done so
that the same 9-volt electrical components used in the "Lego Light &
Sound" line of sets.  So, there you go, now you know that the
accessory voltage supply line coming off of the Lego train motor is 9
volts.  Also, probably by deliberate design, Lego Mindstorms motors
are also 9 volts and use the same Lego power cables.  In 2007, the
9-volt train system was discontinued due to a desire to use cheaper
pure plastic train tracks, a cited lack of volume sales, and issues
with the mass production machinery specific to 9-volt train parts that
would need major servicing.

In October 2006, a line of battery-powered train motors was
introduced.  In 2009, this system was changed to use the new "Power
Functions" systems from the Lego Technic line.  Again, the
long-standing motivation here is the same, to merge the electrical
functions of Lego trains to share more in common with other Lego
product lines.  Also, the desire to make the tracks cheaper have
driven the metal-railed conducting tracks out of the business, and
they are showing no signs of coming back.

----------

Aside.  What does Wikipedia have to say about the current financial
status of Lego?  Nothing!  Well, we know from other sources that Lego
is undergoing tough times from changes in the toy industry and new
forms of competition.  Indeed, this knowledge is instrumental in
understanding many of the discontinuations that have been ongoing in
the Lego Trains line.

20181212/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lego

Also, worthy of note is Wikipedia's mention of the precursor of Lego,
Kiddicraft self-locking bricks.  Ole Kirk Christiansen specifically
saw this toy first before bringing Lego to market, but unfortunately
has been forgotten in many historical narratives.  Alas, we must admit
that now, even Lego is being forgotten from the larger historical
narrative in some ways.

20181212/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilary_Fisher_Page#Kiddicraft

Legos are traditionally made out of ABS plastic, and that material has
not changed in many decades.
