---
layout: post
title: "Changing lenses on a DSLR camera in the field?  Also notes on
        sensor cleaning."
author: quorten
date: 2018-08-17 21:15 -0500
categories: [pentax-k-1-camera, reiterate]
tags: [pentax-k-1-camera, reiterate]
---

Wondering about changing DSLR camera lenses in the field?  Are people
who are doing that using something like a changing bag, like what was
used for good old film developing?  Well, no actually.  They have a
different trick up their sleeve: do the DSLR lens changes blindly
under a jacket, putting their arms through the sleeve holes.  Ah,
tricky.  Now it would be an even more tricky idea if you used that
same trick for successfully developing film in the field.

<!-- more -->

20180817/DuckDuckGo changing bag dslr lenses in the field

This page has some useful tips for keeping dust off the sensor when
changing lenses, nothing out of the ordinary.  Noteworthy is that it
has an "emergency tip": if you can't get dust off the sensor, try
shooting a wider apertures.  Also, it recommends regular cleaning of
the sensor.  However, nowadays thanks to in-camera sensor cleaning
mechanisms, this is not as necessary as it previously was, where you
might clean the sensor by blowing it off at the end of every photo
shooting day.

20180817/https://havecamerawilltravel.com/photographer/changing-lenses/

Particularly, it also has a link to an old but interesting sensor
cleaning article.  Hence I had to consult the Internet Archive Wayback
Machine to get at it.  Noteworthy in this article is an explanation of
how dust can get "welded on," which is typically due to humidity
changes apparently.  Only when dust is "welded on" will you need to do
a wet clean, otherwise a dry clean will do the trick.  Also, in-camera
sensor cleaning mechanisms are basically almost as effective as any
dry clean.  Keeping your camera in a sealed bag with minimal air when
going between different humidity and moisture environments really
helps.

Also noteworthy in this article is the mention that you may need to
use different wet cleaning solutions based off of what your sensor's
filter coatings are.

20180817/https://web.archive.org/web/20100102015852/http://bythom.com/cleaning.htm

Now, that being said, I better find out chemicals are required for wet
cleaning of the Pentax K-1 sensor.  "Sensor Gel Stick" is one thing
that is recommended and apparently works well.  Apparently "Eclipse2"
doesn't give good results.

Oh, and especially good tip here on Pentax Forums.  Yes, even the new
D FA zoom lenses specifically design for DSLR cameras stil have the
problem with sucking in air and blowing dust out onto the sensor.  So,
remember that buying new zoom lenses may not give you a considerable
advantage in minimizing dust over your old, existing,
non-weather-sealed zoom lenses.

20180817/DuckDuckGo pentax k-1 sensor cleaning  
20180817/https://www.pentaxforums.com/forums/190-pentax-k-1/364234-pentax-k-1-sensor-cleaning-how-often-do-you-clean.html  
20180817/https://www.dpreview.com/forums/thread/4077803

----------

Very interesting here, minor corrections made to the review on the
Pentax K-1 Mark II from this site.

20180817/https://www.dpreview.com/articles/1423988259/letter-from-the-reviews-editor-pentax-k-1-mark-ii-studio-scene-re-shoot

Also interesting, Lexar brand makes a return.

20180817/https://www.dpreview.com/news/5361303831/the-lexar-brand-makes-a-return

----------

More sensor cleaning notes.

Again, I reiterate, because this is important!

Looking to create a dust-free environment?  For cleaning DSLR sensors,
the same trick for drying film applies here too: Run a shower in a
bathroom for a short while, then turn it off.  For film negatives, let
your film negatives dry in the bathroom.  For DSLR sensor cleaning,
wait a while to get the humidity to return down to normal to avoid
condensation on the sensor, then clean your sensor in the bathroom.

20180819/DuckDuckGo Ricoh Pentax sensor cleaning  
20180819/https://www.dpreview.com/forums/thread/4245888

Also note, this is the official sensor cleaning kit for Pentax
cameras: Cleaning kit for sensor O-ICK1.

20180819/https://www.ricoh-imaging.co.uk/en/misc/Sensor-cleaning-kit-O-ICK1.html

This is a great video that demonstrates proper wet cleaning of the
Pentax K-1 sensor should you wish to do so.  But, very important
recommendation for both dry and wet cleaning: wear a surgical mask or
other mouth cover.  If you get nervous, you can breathe faster,
releasing microscopic saliva particles into the air.  These can get on
your sensor and end up making it dirtier.

As for the indicated cleaning solutions, we know those must work, as
otherwise why would the poster be using them?

20180819/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U9lMxt-TVUQ

As far as my case of an unclean sensor goes, I've checked it over and
verified that all dust spots seen are larger, gray ones that people
term as "dust bunnies" that can simply be blown off the surface with
some air.  Normally in-camera sensor cleaning would take care of this,
but for whatever reason it's not getting it off, hopefully this would
help, otherwise I could try the static brush or wet cleaning.

Okay, after all this searching, I might just as well buy my own
cleaning supplies.  Initially, I thought for sure I would only use
professional sensor cleaning services, not do it myself, but if the
services are not locally available for my camera...  I might as well
do-it-myself rather than shipping it out.  I can create a "toy DSLR"
camera to practice on.

20180819/DuckDuckGo static brush dslr sensor cleaning  
20180819/https://www.amazon.com/StaticWISK-Anti-Static-Sensor-Brush-SW-010/dp/B0009Z0WD6  
20180819/https://www.howtogeek.com/162413/how-to-cheaply-and-safely-clean-your-cameras-dslr-sensor/

Okay, closer look and evaluation of my condition.  Probably the sensor
spots I'm seeing can't be cleaned by just a better blow, but most of
them will clean away with the anti-static brush.
