---
layout: post
title: Motor vehicle info on Wikipedia and bike boom
author: quorten
date: 2018-09-27 20:00 -0500
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Motor vehicle?  What does Wikipedia have to say about that?  Oh,
interesting.  Mainly Wikipedia focuses on the car.  Actually, it
specifically says that trains are not considered motor vehicles
because a motor vehicle doesn't run on tracks.  The United States had
the highest per-capita car ownership in the mid-2000s, but it's growth
slowed during the Great Recession.  Projected growth rates show that
China's and India's car fleets will eventually surpass that of the
United States.

20180927/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motor_vehicle

But, the really interesting thing that Wikipedia has to say about cars
is how it compares the cost of motor vehicle transport with
non-motorized transport, in the next article.  Specifically, it
mentions a measure introduced by Austrian philosopher Ivan Illich
called _consumer speed_.  Basically, you take the amount of money
someone spends on their car for service, compute the amount of time it
took them to earn that money, and add that time onto the total transit
time.  After all, this is, in fact, the amount of time and money spent
solely for maintaining the car.  Effectively, that adjustment slows
down the total _speed_ of the car.  Matter of fact, some 1970s numbers
basically put the _consumer speed_ of a car to only 5 miles per hour,
a commuting speed that less developed countries travel at without the
use of a motor vehicle.

Rail was retired in many cities as motor vehicles made way.
Nevertheless, eventually rail met a revival and was brought back into
the cities.

20180927/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Effects_of_the_car_on_societies

<!-- more -->

Wow, now this automotive city Wikipedia article is really interesting.
Car-dependent automotive cities?  It was written out quite accurately
in 1950s post-war city planning.  However, little did anyone
anticipate the negative effects that such ideas would bring out.

20180927/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automotive_city  
20180930/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Car_costs

Oh, interesting.  Bike boom.  Yeah, that's something that I haven't
learned very much about in detail before, though I knew it sort of
existed.

20180930/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bike_boom

Foot-and-mouth outbreaks in United Kingdom.  Interesting, a major
event that I haven't really heard much about, but had a big impact on
that area.  Also, it's interesting of the mention of the earlier study
and what has changed in terms of agricultural practices since the
first outbreak that led to the second one still being quite a
disaster.  Foot-and-mouth outbreak is a disease that affects
clovenhoof, pigs, and cattle, but it doesn't really affect humans.
The virus catching on the feet of people can tred it around and make
it highly contagious, so it's important to restrict human traffic when
there is the outbreak among animals too.

20180930/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2001_United_Kingdom_foot-and-mouth_outbreak  
20180930/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foot-and-mouth_disease  
20180930/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2007_United_Kingdom_foot-and-mouth_outbreak
