---
layout: post
title: My Little Pony Movie, updates on box office and reception
author: quorten
date: 2018-10-02 20:00 -0500
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

So, I'm wondering about the My Little Pony movie.  How well did it do?
Looking back on it for its box office financials.  Oh, actually it did
pretty well, apparently.  The multilingual, international sales about
tripled the earnings up to $60 million.  True, not as good as a
Disney/Pixar mainstream like _Frozen_, but pretty good compared to a
niche movie like _Jonah: A VeggieTales Movie_.  Alas, that is a
many-years apart comparison, but the My Little Pony movie still does
at least twice as well accounting for rising costs due to inflation.
Indeed, _Frozen_ was also a multilingual, international movie, and it
looks like the general trend is that going international triples
earnings.

20181002/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/My_Little_Pony:_The_Movie_(2017_film)  
20181002/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonah:_A_VeggieTales_Movie  
20181002/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frozen_(2013_film)

Mentioning the _Frozen_ movie, it also used some highly advanced snow
simulation.  Now, that's a plus for me to look more into.  Also,
something interesting about the _Frozen_ movie was some children
liking the songs so much they would just sing them over and over
again, to the annoyance of some of their peers and parents.  Such to
an extent that a preschooler arranged a Skype call with the
writer/director asking why they brought about such a menance to the
world.
