---
layout: post
title: The story of book development, and why you shouldn't write your own
author: quorten
date: 2018-05-30 22:09 -0500
categories: [blogging]
tags: [blogging]
---

There was once a discussion among some of my coworkers about
documentation on using some sort of cloud platform tool.  I have a
paraphrased version here for the purpose of discussion.  "The book?
But there's the blog too, what's the difference?"  "The blog is all
online, and it was written first.  The book, you have to pay for, but
it contains more information."

So, here's the deal.  All books start out as a series of notes that
are then assembled and organized to create the final book.  A blog, as
it stands, is a collection of individual articles that are
concatenated one after another, in chronological order.  Suffice it to
say, starting out with a blog is a great way to transition into
writing a book.  But a better question is worth asking.  "Why would
you want to write a book?"

<!-- more -->

A book is not a one-sided story.  There are always two parties that
operate in the story of any book: the readers and the writers.  As it
turns out, both have very different interests.  What do the readers
want out of a book?  The answer to that question depends on _who_ the
readers are.

Pleasure readers will tend to look for fiction books and simply read
those from beginning to end.  These are by far the easiest books for
writers to produce, and most publishing industry pundits claim that
there is an oversupply of fiction writers compared to customer demand.
The advent of low-cost digital publication platforms have allowed
publishers to be much more generous in accepting fiction book
submissions.  But, incidentally, the problem remains that there is
very low demand for _reading_ fiction from a digital device: paper
books are preferred; therefore, the new growth in fiction publishing
remains largely untapped by fiction readers.

* Footnote: Matter of fact, I am also working on a fiction writing as
  a hobby.  However, my substantiation in this effort is rather
  particular: the primary purpose of the fiction writing is for
  _internal development notes_ in the process of producing my final
  intended product.  I would have never thought _digital books_ would
  be of interest to my target audience.  Oh, no way.  No, no, no, no,
  no.  The intended product is _digital video_ such as a movie or a
  television series, made available via the Internet, and the intended
  audience myself, family, and friends.  As we all know, digital audio
  and digital video has been experienced an overwhelmingly strong
  adoption by media customers.  It is by far and large the preferred
  way to receive advanced multimedia signals like audio or video,
  compared to the althernatives such as vinyl records, movie film
  reels, audio cassette tapes, and video cassette tapes.

    * However, the oldest of audio-visual media, vinyl records, movie
      film reels, and cathode ray tube television sets, are starting
      to experience a comeback.  Why?  Because now we are approaching
      a time where the youngest generation has never previously
      experienced using the oldest technology in their lifetime, so
      the novelty of the older media forms is mentally intriguing.
      Therefore, working with the older media formats is entertaining,
      even though it is not economically efficient to work with
      compared to the modern technology.

So, with such steep restrictions and requirements on the community of
fiction authors, how do they ever get started?  Simple: they start in
an entirely different environment and community of readers.
Historically, there was the _pulp fiction_ subculture: writers would
submit short stories to a newsletter, magazine, or digest-style
publication that would aggregate the stories and publish them in
regular time intervals, such as monthly volumes.  Subscribers would
read several stories, and converse among themselves about what they
think, and which ones they like best.  Eventually, the best of these
pulp fiction writers would get promoted to professional fiction
writers that actually write the titles read by the mass fiction
readership market.  Of course, nowadays this community dynamic has all
been reinvented online, in the form of fan fiction and other online
fiction community sites.

Now, let's take a trip into the nonfiction side of affairs.  We're
talking serious business here, no time for nonsense playing around
with obsolescent, less efficient ways of doing things like using paper
when digital is faster and cheaper.  Nonfiction readers tend to have
an educational or business-oriented focus.  On the education side of
affairs, the driving force behind reading are principally the choices
of an instructor when designing their course work for the classes they
teach.  An instructor will survey the market for whatever literature
is available, then pick which books _contain_ information that they
like.  The instructor will then winnow down that book and assign only
the subset of chapters and pages that they want their students to read
for the course.  The rest of any other content included in the book
will effectively be ignored.  Wow!  Once you make that statement of
fact, you start to realize that writers targeting the educational
sector should seriously reconsider their approach: rather than
focusing on publishing longer books, they should focus on publishing
shorter articles; that is, the direct items that an instructor will
pick and choose for their course work.

For business-oriented texts, often times there is a strong emphasis on
searchability or reference-style information.  Is the text indexed for
fast searching?  Are there cross references?

Suffice it to say, if you are writing nonfiction, keep in mind that
this will be the mindest of the readers.  Sure you can write your own
"full story" and organize your texts as such, but most readers won't
care to read it.  Most readers will instead want to take their own
path, writer their own story, but use each piece of article
information as-is.  For nonfiction, focus on writing good articles and
sections, but for the high-level organization, design a layout that
works well for "searching," not one that is designed for logical
reading from beginning to end.

So, finally, to wrap up this post.  I started out with a proposition:
You shouldn't write your own "book."  Let's summarize why that is the
case:

* For fiction, getting readership will be an uphill challenge.  By far
  and large, all odds are against you.  The world of fiction is
  largely an incumbent establishment one: those authors who already
  are popular are the ones who have their books printed and sitting on
  physical book shelves, and only those printed fiction books are the
  ones that are popularly read by fiction readers.  By contrast, if
  you target a _small fan community_ and focus on _short stories_ and
  other article-like fiction material, your chances of being
  successful are much higher.

* For nonfiction, although people will love the individual articles of
  content you produce, they will not be so fond of any of your efforts
  to produce higher-level organization relating to the goal of
  expecting the readers to read the text from cover-to-cover.  Nope.
  The order in which the material is read and the subset of it that
  does get read is fully a decision of the reader; so much, that the
  value of attempts on the writer's side to add "organization" that
  does not relate to improving searchability is effectively nil.
