---
layout: post
title: Zooniverse, Galaxy Zoo, Raspberry Pi, and unmotivated teens
author: quorten
date: 2018-09-20 12:33 -0500
categories: [tour-de-force]
tags: [tour-de-force]
---

Galaxy Zoo?  Zooniverse?  I remember learning about those websites in
my astronomy class in 2014 (2015?).  Well, let's take another look,
let's see how it's like in 2018.

20180920/https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/zookeeper/galaxy-zoo  
20180920/https://www.zooniverse.org

Okay, now this is interesting.  There are 1.6 million registered users
in Zooniverse.  Wow, that's not that many... well, comparing to mass
social media websites such as Facebook. but sure, it's almost on the
same order of magnitude as Raspberry Pi users.  For sure, the two go
together.  Both are arguably much more productive than the kinds of
things that happen on Facebook and YouTube, but despite the
usefulness, neither have reached the market penetration of Facebook,
YouTube, etc.  However, Zooniverse has the added benefit that it is
deliberately designed to be easy to access from tablets and
smartphones.

20180920/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspberry_Pi

<!-- more -->

Now, this is interesting.  They do transcription of manuscripts on
Zooniverse too?  Yes.  However, I am a bit taken aback by what
happened here.  Researchers wanted to test whether independent
transcription or collaborative transcription is more accurate.  I
think the answer should be obvious here: if you ever had to transcribe
your own notes, you know it's always easier when the job is mostly
done and you can just scan for minor errors: less cognitive load means
you'll end up being more accurate.  However, what takes me aback is
that the researchers did not want to inform the community in advance
"to avoid altering the results," but only later openly acknowledged it
when questions came up in the forum.  Yes, it's good that they openly
acknowledged that, but in some sense, when you visit the forum and
read the responses, it seems like there is a lack of good
communication going on between the site organizers and the community
members.  In some sense, it seems this can also garner a lack of trust
from the community members.

20180920/https://daily.zooniverse.org/2018/09/14/independent-vs-collaborative-transcription-zooniverse-research-anti-slavery-manuscripts/  
20180920/https://www.bpl.org/blogs/post/independent-vs-collaborative-transcription-zooniverse-research-anti-slavery-manuscripts/  
20180920/https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/bostonpubliclibrary/anti-slavery-manuscripts/talk/1375/552373

Again, I reiterate, because this is important!  Relinking to this
article about how modern teens won't be interested in Raspberry Pi.

20180920/https://www.zdnet.com/article/is-raspberry-pi-a-mid-life-crisis/

Today's young teens aren't interested?  Well, there is an important
message being hidden here in that statement.  Yes, that is true.  But,
take a look at other similar projects like Blender.  Who is the main
demographic that is interested in learning and using Blender?
20-some-year-olds.  (Most of which are men.)  The point here is this.
One thing we knew was always true, probably throughout the entire
history of the world, is that 20-some-year-olds are generally
interested in learning new things, in learning new skills.  They have
to be, for a number of practical reasons.  But, for teenagers, well
that generally was never the case.  Indeed, the 1980s computer
revolution posed an interesting corner-case, almost miraculous, that
probably won't be repeated for a long time to come.  Until then, we're
going to have to be satsified with the mainstay population of
20-some-year-olds that fuel the Raspberry Pi momentum.

Indeed, Raspberry Pi is instrumental to a minority of younger citizens
and older citizens who are interested in learning it.  Especially for
the few but highly motivated younger citizens, the lower entry
barriers really make a big difference.
