---
layout: post
title: Chart for student motivation-intelligence
author: quorten
date: 2018-09-12 11:02 -0500
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

    Student motivation-intelligence chart

                student     student
                 slow        fast

              +----------+----------+
    student   | student  | good     |
    not       | fails    | grades   |
    motivated | and      | but      |
              | quits    | student  |
              |          | quits    |
              +----------+----------+
    student   | human    | student  |
    motivated | teacher  | passes,  |
              | quits,   | continues|
              | self-    | study    |
              | study    |          |
              +----------+----------+

Now, obviously something we've made clear from this chart.  This chart
primarily involves _humans_.  The one case where the student is
motivated but a slow learner?  A human teacher will get impatient and
quit, but the student will keep going with their own "self-study,"
meaning they learn from books, computers, and electronic course work
that does not require a human teacher in the loop.  For the student,
above and beyond all means, their motivation determines their success
in learning the subject.  A human teacher, however, will not appraise
a student who is motivated but a slow learner.  Likewise, a human
teacher might get highly motivated over a student who proves to be a
fast learner, then disappointed when that student quits because they
were never motivated to being with, or they lost motivation over time.

Now you might be interested in adding a chart for human teachers, but
there's not really a point in doing that.  If there is a problem with
a bad human teacher but a student is highly motivated, they will
search for a better human teacher if needed.  For students who are not
intrinsically motivated, a good teacher might succeed in making the
class, and therefore themself, "look better" to their superiors, but
it still doesn't do justice to the underlying motivations, or lack
thereof.

Now, there is of course a different story going on if you look at an
employment evaluation chart, between employer and employee, between
buyer and seller.  Well, that's something explore later.

"Fake it until you make it."  Wikipedia doesn't have much to say on
the subject, so you must web search for other sources.

20180912/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fake_it_till_you_make_it  
20180912/DuckDuckGo fake it until you make it  
20180912/https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/243629  
20180912/https://www.inc.com/justin-bariso/why-fake-it-till-you-make-it-is-so-effective-according-to-science.html

20180914/DuckDuckGo fake it until you make it  
20180914/https://www.forbes.com/sites/lisaquast/2017/08/14/why-you-should-stop-trying-to-fake-it-till-you-make-it/#1b683032799d  
20180914/https://www.quora.com/What-does-it-mean-to-fake-it-till-you-make-it
