---
layout: post
title: Random notes today, 06-06
author: quorten
date: 2018-06-06 02:00 -0500
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

So, what exactly is being "mean"?  I think the core points to realize
are as follows:

* "Being mean" is defined primarily as an interaction between people.
  Objects on their own can't be "mean" unless they closely model
  similar behavior originally observed from humans.

* What makes a person mean is the emotional reaction evoked in the
  respondant.  That is, the actions of the person being observed are
  perceived by the respondant with the emotional feeling that such
  actions are being "mean."  Therefore, this assertion can vary from
  person to person, culture to culture.

So, what does Wikipedia have to say about people being "mean"?  Well,
basically the same thing, but with historical accounts too.

20180606/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meanness

What else does the Internet have anything to say about that?  I
couldn't find really anything from a search, though I have for sure
seen evidence out there and wrote it down in my previous notes.

Failed search.

20180606/DuckDuckGo diversity and economy recession boom

However, I've found some other interesting articles on economics.

20180606/https://www.thebalance.com/economic-boom-4067682  
20180606/http://money.cnn.com/2018/05/01/news/economy/us-economy-great-recession-recovery/index.html

Well, anyways.  The United States overall has had quite an interesting
economic history, with actually quite a bit of prosperity for quite
some time.  Overall, that's the big picture.  Now, yes, there are
those times with the economic recessions.
