---
layout: post
title: HTML 5, WHATWG, and W3C
author: quorten
date: 2018-07-29 22:57 -0500
categories: [web-dev]
tags: [web-dev]
---

So, wondering about the HTML 5 standard and the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C)?  Has the W3C since fallen out of favor compared to
direct cooperation between Apple, Microsoft, Google, and Mozilla on
web standards?  Not so.  Here's what happened?  For a short period of
time, HTML 5 development shifted away from the W3C and toward the Web
Hypertext Applications Technology Working Group (WHATWG), but then
another shift occurred.  The W3C resumed involvement, but under a
different initiative than was used by WHATWG: the W3C focused on
taking the newer features, and "drawing a line in the sand" to set a
specific version of the HTML 5 standard, HTML 5.0.  Whereas, in the
case of WHATWG, they wanted to continue to evolve a "Living Standard,"
without declaring official standard versions.  As conditions appear,
it seems that WHATWG has since fallen out of favor for the use of
"living standards," where the standard evolves progressively, in favor
of more direct cooperation between the leading browser vendors.
However, for solidly built and clearly defined standards, the W3C is
still the champion in this respect.

<!-- more -->

What had to change?  One very important thing: given the increased
complexity and precision of the newer standards, it is no longer
possible for the W3C to produce standards documents that are also very
well readable by average developers seeking to use the technology.
Rather, such developers are now encouraged to look elsewhere for
gentler introductions or programmer-oriented reference manuals.  The
specification, as it stands, is where you go to get very precise
details about the correct behavior of specific features and functions
conforming to a particular implementation version of HTML 5.  Thus,
the standards documents are going to be too detailed and not brief
enough to serve as a useful reference manual for programmers wishing
to learn about specific features and functions at a glance.

That being said, that is really something true to take to heart, the
old W3C versus the new W3C.  In the new world, one great reference of
choice is Mozilla Developer Network (MDN).  Microsoft Software
Developers Network (MSDN) was once useful for learning HTML and
JavaScript but has long since fallen out of favor.  (It was always
much harder to use for learning CSS, though still doable.)  There are
also similar references from Google, and maybe Apple, but somehow I
find those to be less readable than MDN.

20180729/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WHATWG  
20180729/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Wide_Web_Consortium  
20180729/http://www.w3.org/standards/  
20180729/http://www.w3.org/standards/webdesign/  
20180729/http://www.w3.org/standards/webdesign/htmlcss  
20180729/http://www.w3.org/standards/techs/html  
20180729/https://www.w3.org/TR/2017/REC-html52-20171214/  
20180729/https://www.w3.org/TR/2017/REC-html52-20171214/introduction.html#background

The W3's site structure hasn't changed very much in years.  In some
ways, it looks dated.  In other ways, it looks like a logical
continuum of features developed for earlier forms of modern devices.
The web of devices section is particularly illustrative in this
regard.

20180729/http://www.w3.org/standards/webofdevices/  
20180729/http://www.w3.org/standards/webdesign/mobilweb  
20180729/http://www.w3.org/standards/webofdevices/tv
