---
layout: post
title: Mr. Money website about personal finance
author: quorten
date: 2018-10-08 20:00 -0500
categories: [personal-finance]
tags: [personal-finance]
---

Oh, really interesting article here.

20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2018/10/05/the-fire-movement/  
20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/about/

Okay, okay, let's back up.  What is "FIRE" thing that is being talked
about?  It is an acronym: Financial Independence, Retire Early.
"Financial Independence" implies this: you have enough assets and
investments to fund your living expenses, therefore you do not _need_
to be employed and working for someone else to keep paying for your
living expenses.  The "retire early" part?  Well, that is a choice
made by one of the proponents of the movement, i.e. the author of the
aforementioned website, but it is not _required_, also as explained on
the website.

So, how did the author of the site get this rich?  Well, the equation
was surprisingly simple, in their words.  They were just employed in
typical American middle class tech jobs, in from engineering and
computer science degrees.  However, they only spent what they needed
to meet their living expenses, and was overall quite frugal in their
spending compared to their peers.  Also, they had some investments (in
stock market index funds) and two rental homes.  Then one day, to
their surprise, they looked at their available earnings, and realized
they didn't _need_ to keep working as they were to pay for their
future life expenses.  So that's how they got started, simply put.

<!-- more -->

20181008/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIRE_movement  
20181008/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_independence  
20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2013/02/22/getting-rich-from-zero-to-hero-in-one-blog-post/  
20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2011/05/18/how-to-make-money-in-the-stock-market/

Now, as for the rest of the site.  On one side, the site describes
some of the wins of financial independence in greater detail.  On the
other side, let's just say that a whole lot of it is observing the
"clown circus" that some unfortunate folks have gotten themselves
into.

20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/category/mmm-classics/  
20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2013/11/11/get-rich-with-the-position-of-strength/  
20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2015/04/15/great-news-early-retirement-doesnt-mean-youll-stop-working/

Now this article about money wasted on vehicles, trucks in particular.
It's really interesting.  Dang, so that's how expensive those
chrome-plated pickup trucks are.  And, most of that money that the
buyer of such new chrome-plated trucks put down?  It disappears in
depreciation after the first year of ownership.  Okay, well I'm not
quite sure if it's _most_... but yeah, it's a lot.

20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2015/04/28/what-does-your-work-truck-say-about-you/

Electric cars?  Now, for sure, this site author is going to have
something to say that's lost on the economics of them... no?  Yeah,
actually not for the most part.  Just the problem with customer
relations that some of the car companies have, for being too
old-fashioned compared to the high-tech equipment they are selling.
Overall, electric vehicles are quite economic.  Even in winter...
well they could go a lot further if they were better engineered for
winter.

20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2017/10/06/electric-car-vs-winter/

Interesting idea here in the guest article.  Conspicuous consumption?
Well, it can be used in a good way too.  The costs of a train bill?
You are seeing the full true costs, with no costs being hidden in
depreciation.  Another interesting idea.  Putting toys in glass
display cases.  Next time the author's children wanted to buy new
toys?  Look at what's already in the display cases.  Is it all that
different from what they already have?  Does the cost justify the
expense?

20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2017/10/24/get-rich-with-conspicuous-consumption/

Very interesting points here!  What a big difference one can make on
their food bills by conscientious spending.  As of 2013, averaging
meals (667 Calories for 2000 Calorie diet) around $1.00 is a great
target to aim for.  Not to mention, lots of staple foods already are
below the target price for a meal.

20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2012/03/29/killing-your-1000-grocery-bill/

Wow, the money that some people can waste on excessive cleaning.  Not
to mention the corresponding health risk with some modern cleaning
chemicals being overused.

20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2013/12/30/are-you-cleaning-out-your-own-wallet/

What the author is teaching his son about money.  Investing, saving,
yes, things like that are emphasized, in addition to the basics.

20181008/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2015/05/20/what-im-teaching-my-son-about-money/

Some more articles linked from the front page.

20181009/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2011/12/05/muscle-over-motor/  
20181009/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2011/09/13/domestic-outsourcing-practical-or-wussypants/  
20181009/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2011/10/06/the-true-cost-of-commuting/

WARNING: Contains inappropriate language.

20181009/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2011/10/02/what-is-stoicism-and-how-can-it-turn-your-life-to-solid-gold/

WARNING: Contains inappropriate language.

20181009/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2012/02/01/mr-money-mustaches-big-mistake/
