---
layout: post
title: Reflections on why my notes have grown to be so big
date: 2018-05-15
author: quorten
categories: [blogging]
tags: [blogging]
---

I do have to admit that I am somewhat annoyed by our modern day tech 
world.  Yes, it is innovating much faster than before, but it is also 
much less organized than before, and there are no signs that the future 
innovations will ever become very well organized like the past progress 
has become.  The community as a whole seems to just grow more and more 
fragmented, with specialized knowledge of their particular area but 
ultimately a smaller slice of the whole tech knowledge pie.  Also, 
that's the same reason why my notes are so big... I had to write them 
because there was no such organized structure already in the world.  
And, ultimately, they are still less organized than I would like, but 
that will hopefully be changing fast soon as I take some time to add in 
more categories and tags.

* Footnote: The volume of these notes points to how disorganized
  the modern tech  industry is at a global level.  I never had to
  do this for the standard C library, I would just consult the
  official reference documentation.

    * But the biggest thing, the fact that so many people have become
      accustomed to working in such a sloppy software environment.
      And purportedly Internet search engines are the driving force
      that keep the gears turning despite the mess.

* Discontinuous communities, the fact that they do not regularly
  communicate.  You can really see it when you look at the way their
  software is implemented.  Even though they may be solving the exact
  same problems in the exact same way using the exact same base
  technologies, the fact that they do need to still make arbitrary
  symbolic decisions is where they start to diverge and become
  incompatible.  And once they become incompatible, they can develop a
  sense of inertia when it comes down to the decision of restoring
  compatibility versus building off of their own systems.

Also, search engines aren't really helping with the problem either, as 
they visibly display the same knowledge issues that are evident in the 
humans involved in the tech community: old knowledge can be found great, 
but not too old, because then it predates the Internet.  Also, the fact 
that you have to search with special keywords else you're not gong to 
find what you're looking for.  Or, even when you do search using the 
right keywords, your high-level intent is ultimately misguided, so you 
think you find what you want, but that turns out to not really be the 
case.

Unfortunately, all I can say is that this problem can only continue to 
get worse for some time to come.  To my knowledge, no single human has 
mastered the entirety of modern computing with sufficient rigor to pass 
my criteria.  So if anything, it's going to come down to getting a 
single computer to master this all, which isn't going to happen for 
quite some time.  Until then, things are only going to keep getting 
worse.

Also, there's the another reason as to why my notes are so big: maybe I 
just have a prospensity toward wanting to make a copy of all important 
information and write everything down.
