---
layout: post
title: "Saying \"no\" to enterprise customers who want to pay to keep
        an obsolete feature going"
date: 2018-12-14 19:37 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Now, this is interesting.  In the history of some large enterprise
software companies, there were some features that they really wanted
to retire from their products, but the first few couple of times they
tried to retire it, one of their big corporate customers paid them to
keep it going, so they changed their mind and accepted the money.
Now, quite intuitively, we can know that this is wrong, but the question
is how do you firmly say "no" to those customers?

First of all, you have to remind yourself think about why you wanted
to deprecate that obsolete feature.  The obsolete feature no longer
makes sense in the modern world because it's just yet another way of
doing things.  The feature was originally developed because it was
thought that nothing else existed at the time.  But, in the modern
context, a much more mainstream way of doing that thing has emerged,
and you honestly don't want to keep doing that thing in your
incompatible, non-standard, in-house developed way.  Simply by
creating less inconsistency in the abstract symbolism used to leverage
that feature, you make everyone's lives easier.  Most importantly, it
makes yourself more efficient, more capable of moving forward faster
to the actual new features that people want, and ultimately a better
participant in the modern economy, serving more people with less work.

<!-- more -->

So, let's revisit the premise we've first described.  You have this
obsolete feature that you know you want to get rid of for the better
of the entire world, but this one really big customer comes to you and
offers you a really big chunk of money to keep it going.  The
motivation of the weaker decision makers is obvious: it's more money
if you accept their offer, and more money is better, right?  Wrong.
It's _not_ more money if you accept their offer, it's actually less.
The motivation for removing the feature that we've just described is
simple: _it grows the economy_.  By contrast, the monetary proposition
of continuing the legacy feature does not.

So, basically you have to be able to express these key points to the
customer who is willing to pay you to continue a legacy feature.

* You're offering a fixed chunk of money.  It should be your goal to
  spend that money in the smartest way possible, and whether or not
  that's your goal, it's our goal.  We're not going to take the money
  if the premise of doing so is a poor monetary decision.

* Our goal is to move fast and grow fast into a market that is better
  for the economy at large.  The startup companies that we're
  competing against are not being given such large monetary offers, so
  we don't need it either.  Matter of fact, we don't _want_ it since
  we want to build our company to be natively competitive with those
  startup companies.

* Because we're developing a feature that grows the economy, we'll end
  up earning much more money in the long run than you're offering in
  the short run.

* With that much money you're offering, you can instead spend that
  money on a consulting company that will get you migrated off the
  legacy feature.
