---
layout: post
title: The impact of locking down blog publishing
author: quorten
date: 2018-05-29 06:16 -0500
categories: [blogging]
tags: [blogging]
---

Looking at writing and documentation practices in the business world,
I've noticed an interesting phenomenon that is quite similar to what
we've been observing on Wikipedia for quite a few years: just adding a
little bit more restriction to a publication platform dramatically
reduces contributors.  Like, it's a exponential relationship.  Why is
this?  Writing, as a part of a person's everyday workflow, is very
sensitive to interruptions.  In general, there aren't very many people
in any particular community who are have a disposition toward writing.
Of the few who do, they tolerate very little interruption.  Matter of
fact, they have so little tolerance toward interruption in the writing
process that they will flat out reject any platform that requires a
review process.  Nope, it doesn't work.  Zero tolerance toward review
processes.

<!-- more -->

The ideal environment to get the most written information is a "dumb"
slate: you write to the device, and it retains your writings without
any question as to the political validity of the writings contained
therein.  As soon as you define a "process" for writers to follow
through for approval, writers quickly change their mind to simply
avoid the process in its entirety.  Writers will aggressively switch
to a different medium or platform as soon as restrictions start
getting added.  Again, remember that these are people who do **not**
intend to be "professional" writers: writing is simply a part of their
workflow to bringing other tasks to completion.  Therefore, the
overhead on concentrating on a publication process, following through
on communications, and participating in the review process is too much
wasted time to be worth it.

So, getting back to Wikipedia.  We can see this exact same story
clearly played out.  Wikipedia started adding restrictions to combat
vandalism, then contributor and article growth slowed down.  Why did
this have to happen?  The motivations should be obvious: Wikipedia is
a volunteer contributor encyclopedia.  The mainstay source of
Wikipedia's information is that of "nonprofessional" writers: that is,
people who are primarily interesting on working on a different task,
say IT systems administration for example, but also want to build a
useful information reference they can refer back to.  Hence, Wikipedia
historically played an extremely instrumental role in this regard.  In
particular, the collaborative community nature of Wikipedia was
instrumental in making the site familar to the concept of _user
groups_, a concept very familiar to those in the tech community to
help with learning new technologies and problem solving.

Wikipedia's lock-down actions nearly crushed this community.  With the
growth in power of super-admins and bots on Wikipedia and the
bureaucracy they imposed, many contributors found that it was
non-productive to stay on the site and just left.  Remember,
_productivity_ here is being measured in terms of _working on a
different task_ and using Wikipedia as a **tool** to help accomplish
the primary task.  By far, the biggest problem of super-admins and
bots is that they tend to focus on the system as "an end in itself"
rather than a means to an end: rather than thinking the system is
something that is merely in the way of achieving another goal, they
think that the system is the goal in itself.  (Bots are the ultimate
manifestation of bureaucracy, as their goals being the system in
itself are in fact one-in-the-same.)

However, this community of tech subject contributors hasn't completely
vanished from Wikipedia.  Some of the senior members, who started
early in this community are still around Wikipedia.  Theses are also
people who, naturally, worked with older technologies of times past,
so they have knowledge to write about those subjects.  By contrast,
the biggest hit was taken on the junior members.  The junior members
have an interesting demographics compared to the senior members:
whereas both groups work with similar technologies _in the present_,
the junior members have no memory of the older technologies of times
past.  For them, their _only_ knowledge for writing articles can be on
the latest technologies.  The point in hand here is that the cut-off
of junior members has resulted in distinctively skewed content on
Wikipedia in the tech sector: newer technologies are less represented
than expected.  Unfortunately for the case of Wikipedia, this sets it
off in a serious spiral decline: senior members will be almost
exclusively interested in learning about the newer technology, but
junior members are not there to add information on it.  This in turn
demotivates even the senior members from continuing to contribute,
which thus causes the spiral decline.
