---
layout: post
title: History of Quorten Blog 1
date: 2018-05-13 22:00:00 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [blogging]
tags: [blogging]
---

Quorten Blog 1 started out as mere text files written in a 
quasi-Markdown syntax, originally not available online.  Actually, most 
of the text came from only two huge text files.  With the help of some 
automated conversion tools, these notes were brought into the 21st 
century in blog form.  Incidentally, many of my notes were summaries of 
information that came from existing blogs, but sure, you know the way 
the web works... more redundant information in slightly different forms 
always improves the quality of search engine results.

The imported posts encompass most of my previously written tech notes in 
terms of volume.  Although there will be more older notes to come, most 
of them will be fairly small compared to the initial import.

### Two large text files?

Now, you're probably wondering, "Why did you create two large text
files?  Why not create one text file per article?  After all, that's
what Jekyll runs off of."  Well, good questions there.  Basically, the
reason had to do with on-disk layouts for local filesystems.  After
all, I did say that the historic notes were all stored locally, did I?
Oh, okay, I didn't say that yet, but that was the original intent.  As
for the original reason as to why they weren't accessible from the
Internet, that was because I did not put them in the `public_html` of
my Unix home directory, and even if I did, it still wouldn't have been
accessible from the Internet because I wanted to keep my machine
entirely behind a firewall for easier security maintenance, or not
have to run it 24/7.

So anyways, the point is that if you write a bunch of short text
files, since every file needs to be padded out to a minimum of 4 KB of
disk space on a traditional local filesystem, you end up wasting disk
space compared to a few larger text files.  So I kept everything in a
few large text files.  Then I combined some of my large text files
into one huge text file to make searching "all my writings" more
convenient, at least from a local computer.  Finally, once the text
file got larger than 4 MB, I had to give way and make a compromise
with a few large text files rather than only a single huge text file,
otherwise it took too much disk I/O to save it.

* Footnote: In the past, the RAM consumption during editing would have
  been considered an issue, but not so much anymore now that 1 GB of
  RAM is considered small.

### The alternative solution?

Git and GitHub.  With Git, you can pack and compress a bunch of small
text files into a single larger local file.  Therefore, you do not
need to worry about wasting local disk space, but you still get the
convenience of being able to create one file per article.  (You have
to pull off some pretty nifty Git tricks to do this, though.  I might
discuss those in more detail in a later blog post.)

* Footnote: You can also do likewise with TAR and ZIP files.  Yeah,
  but the point is, what's the motivation if some technology or use
  case doesn't _require_ it?  If you are the single local user, just
  using text dividers in a single large text file is easier.

With GitHub, you can publish that repository to the Internet via
GitHub pages with ease.  Consequentially, you can then use Internet
search engines to search your text files.  Incidentally, I must
mention that with GitHub, you do not need to think about paying for
hosting your simple text files, which is important because otherwise
you would quickly take the site down if you think people aren't using
it and it doesn't benefit yourself compared to local storage and
access.

Unfortunately, GitHub is not for everyone.  If you read the fine print
of the terms and conditions, you'll notice that they have some very
curious terms if they are to be interpreted together: for example, the
first time I checked (circa 2016), there is one term requiring the
user to be greater than a certain age, and there is another term
allowing updates to the terms of conditions.  You know where they can
go with this.  On the other hand, you could argue that such highly
detailed terms cannot be practically enforced, except in the highly
unlikely case that you'd end up in court.  Therefore, those terms can
be ignored.  Still, the legal language is enough to scare some people
away, unfortunately, especially when one doesn't "feel it is a life
necessity."  So, as with all "needs," there is a cultural dimension to
this too, one that is independent of the absolute requirements of
human needs.

* Footnote: In fact, to be honest, the main reason why I got started
  creating a GitHub account was that I felt it was necessary to submit
  some pull requests to some open-source projects that I was using at
  work.  So, there you go.  That was the cultural dimension that
  pushed me toward creating a GitHub account.

    * Yes, absolutely.  All that nasty "adhesion contract" legalese is
      something most of us would never accept to if we had a choice
      with a more sane alternative, even if it still was an "adhesion
      contract."

      20180515/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_form_contract  
      20180515/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unconscionability

### Past and Present

Back in 2010 when I started writing much of my expanded tech notes,
GitHub was a newfangled thing.  Nowadays, in the year 2018, people
have been chatting positively about this GitHub for quite some years
now, because, more importantly, it's what most people use nowadays.
GitHub alone was the force that caused the shutdown of Google Code,
Microsoft CodePlex, and many more.  So, now I know that this GitHub is
really something.  Back in the day around the year 2005,
SourceForge.net was one of the really big things in collaborative
software development and free, libre, open-source software.  Not so
much anymore, and the same thing can happen to GitHub.

So, why am I not concerned about this?  Well, first of all, either way
all of my writings are still plain text files, written in Markdown
syntax, perfectly readable without special software.

* Footnote: Indeed, I vividly remember arguing with myself and
  ultimately passing up the opportunity to write my notes in Rich Text
  Files or Word Documents for the sake of compatibility,
  interoperability, and simply readability as plain text.  Due to the
  advent of GitHub, Markdown has simultaneously become a _de facto_
  standard in lightweight markup languages for web publishing, and the
  web itself is a reputable standard for browsing/viewing.

They are still easy to `grep` on a local computer system, but they now
have the added convenience of being easily accessible from the
Internet too.  Ultimately, for whatever future hot new thing comes
along, I'll be able to just as easily forward migrate my old text data
into the new system, just as I have done with this current GitHub
system.

That being said, it's really a bummer that the user-friendly WYSIWYG
GUI systems are still troubled in this regard.  In the past (1979 -
1995), it was proprietary file formats that was the inhibitor.  In the
present (2005 - 2018), it is proprietary databases and segmented
websites, each of which can be independently discontinued, that are
the inhibitor.  Suffice it to say, it's the same problem, just that it
keeps getting reinvented using more modern technologies.  Almost every
single time a technological upgrade happens, the users who choose to
use WYSIWYG GUI systems end up loosing all their old data, but
incidentally most of them don't care either.  (There have been some
notable exceptions in the past, but the common case still holds.)
Nevertheless, these systems remain perpetually popular and
commercially lucrative in all eras of technology despite their
shortcomings.

### Style Remarks

Oh, and some comments on my writing style.  Unfortunately
(GitHub-flavored) Markdown does not have a standard for inserting
footnotes into documents.  In my previous quasi-Markdown writing, I've
developed a habit of "faking" footnotes via interrupting the flow of
text with bullet point lists.  I continue that same habit into, only
this time I add "Footnote:" as the first thing of the first such
bullet point that interrupts the flow of text.  In fact, you've
already seen an example of this style in this blog post.  Footnote
interruptions can be recursive, hence bullet points may be nested.

Also, Markdown does not have syntax for underlining text, only bold
and italic.  Incidentally, however, most of my writings do not need
such detailed distinction, so that is okay for me.

You'll also note some curious habits that I've developed in my
language use that would not correspond to the formal written English
standard of the late 2000s.

* The English language lacks certain grammatical constructs found in
  other natural languages.  Sometimes I borrow these constructs for my
  own convenience, even though it means my writings can't be strictly
  interpreted as formal written English.

* I developed the use of redundant language in my writings to make
  searching them via primitive local search engine techniques easier.

* You'll notice that I use timestamped URLs.  The purpose of this is
  so that it is easy to find the original contents in the Internet
  Archive Wayback Machine, in case the URL no longer resolves on the
  modern Internet.  Also, I try to save summaries of the page contents
  in case even an archived copy of the page in question is no longer
  accessible.

* You'll also notice that I log my search queries, via a timestamp and
  the name of the search engine I used with the search query.

* Historically, I've developed a natural language tagging mechanism to
  try to measure how important some of my articles/writings are so
  that I can focus on them when doing revisions into a more organized
  work.  Of course, nowadays I have categories and tags I can use on
  the blog for a similar purpose.  Those historic phrases were kept
  inside the transferred writings for posterity and are as follows:

    * The same subject is repeated more than once: "Again, I
      reiterate, because this is important!"

    * Keeping track of when information is found from a search: "I
      searched for this and found it, that means it's important!"
