---
layout: post
title: Random notes today, 09-06
author: quorten
date: 2018-09-06 18:00 -0500
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

Oh, this is interesting.  A U of M student applies knowledge on
package engineering for the better of a product.  Interesting, here,
because as I've heard, much of these student's struggles were already
considered a solved problem many decades before.  But, well... maybe
it's harder for someone who hasn't done it before, even if it has been
done before.  A learning gap, or maybe the university education wasn't
as good as it could be, or it was more theoretical/philosophical
rather than practical.  The reasons can go on and on.

20180906/https://ccaps.umn.edu/story/package-makes-perfect

Single point of failure?  What does Wikipedia have to say about that?
Well, it's kind of what you thought.  The classic Wikipedia bias,
focusing mainly on the computer aspects of single point of failure.

20180906/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_point_of_failure

But, interestingly, it also made reference to aspects of single point
of failure in other professions, such as "intelligence," in the
government military sense.  Edward Snowden called himself "a single
point of failure" for lots of information.  That is, the knowledge in
question was possessed only by him.

20180906/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Snowden
20180906/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Snowden#Public_opinion_polls

Interestingly, there's an entire Wikipedia article on "global
surveilance," mainly in terms of the government involvement of the
mentioned subject.

20180906/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_surveillance

Google released this interesting "state of DevOps" report.  A notable
highlight of my personal interest: outsourcing.  Interesting, the
report states that the highest performers rarely outsource whole
business functions, but rather only part of business functions, while
the other part remains within the company.  So, as it goes with
outsourcing, the best companies are those that "outsource" mainly for
greater coverage or capacity, not to run the business entirely for
some particular sub-function.

20180906/https://cloudplatformonline.com/rs/248-TPC-286/images/DORA-State%20of%20DevOps.pdf

This is an interesting article about your personal thoughts and
conceptions of other ending up subtly affecting their performance to
fulfill your bias, regardless of whether it be true or not.
Interestingly, although hard experimental results are proven with lab
rats, and the same is believed to be true in education with humans,
empirical studies with humans are still inconclusive toward supporting
this hypothesis, and the results weren't particularly strong.

20180907/https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2018/09/07/644530036/watch-can-you-affect-another-persons-behavior-with-your-thoughts

No, no, no.  Now I have to fill in my experience about reading this
subject.  Indeed there were some empirical studies on this.  However,
the previous studies were more about imparting a growth mindset in the
students or not.  Yes, similar concept, but slightly different
experimental implementation and resulting details.
