---
layout: post
title: Pollinator decline, prairies, wetlands, bobcat, golden toad
author: quorten
date: 2018-12-08 22:48 -0600
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

Pollinator decline.  Yeah, I saw that in my previous reference to the
defaunation article, but didn't read through it in more detail.  So
now I'm investigating it more.

Wow, there has been quite a drastic decline in bees in the past few
decades.  Hive failure rates up to 50% in some regions?  6% decline of
flying biomass a year?  What are the causes of the drops?

* Pesticides

* Rapid transfer of pollinator species diseases around the world

* Loss of habitat and forage

* Air pollution

* Changes in seasonal behavior due to global warming

* Artificial lighting at night.  Increased use of blue light at night
  in recent years is perhaps the most noteworthy aspect.  The
  distinctive yellow orange color of sodium vapor street lighting of
  times past, besides looking curiously interesting to humans, was
  technically energy efficient, low luminosity (orange has a high
  perceptive brightness to humans), and interfered minimally with
  animal night life.  Nowadays, the switchover to bluish-white LED
  street lighting was motivated primarily for energy efficiency
  purposes, to be even more energy efficient than the sodium vapor
  lights of times past.  Only in hindsight are people realizing the
  negative effects of the switchover.  But, by contrast, urban city
  centers have long been favoring whiter light upon the belief that it
  is brighter and safer for the human populance.

But, come on!  Suffice it to say, many of the mitigations are quite
simple to commence upon.  Switching to pesticides that are not harmful
to pollinators, for example.  Also, another interesting one was
planting wild flowers at the borders of grain farms that otherwise
provide very little nectar that is essential to bumble bees.

20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pollinator_decline

<!-- more -->

Praries are also a great source of wild flowers and other habitat
characteristics that are helpful to pollinators.  Alas, much prarie
land has been eliminated, and praries are now the subject of
restoration.

Interestingly, Fermi Lab is an important area for one prairie
restoration project.  Wow, interesting visual here.  In the midst of a
highly modern, artificial, refined building for particle accelerator
experiments, there is a throwback to older times past with an prairie
restoration project.

20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prairie_restoration

Thinking about prarie restoration... "drain the swamp."  What about
swamps?  Nowadays after having been drained, flooded, eliminated, or
otherwise attacked, they are on the game plan for restoration too.

Importantly, swamps are distinguished from marshes and bogs in that
the tree cover is an important part of its definition.

Wow... quite nice looking photos of the swamps there.

20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swamp

Ah, the good old times of swamps.  Seeing natural light sources in
swamps from mild natural gas combustions, fireflies, and so forth, and
the folklore that came about from it.

20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Will-o%27-the-wisp

Bogs, marshes, wetlands.  Again, quite nice looking photos.

20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bog  
20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marsh  
20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wetland

Traditionally, humans have placed very little value on wetlands,
purportedly because wetlands are not natively a very habitable climate
to humans, and wetlands can feature plants, animals, diseases, and
invertebrates that are dangerous to humans.  Hence the motivation to
drain or flood so many traditional wetlands, especially around Europe
where they were traditionally highly abundant, but not so much in the
name of one of the largest, densest, most highly developed human
population centers of the world.  Some areas lost 90% of their native
wetlands.  But, nowadays, people are now recognizing the natural water
purification and other important biological functions that wetlands
provide.  Some wetlands are engineered deliberately as a means of
wastewater treatment, in place of a more industrial-style sewage
treatment plant.  Of course, in both cases, the goal is to speed up
sewage treatment faster than is the case without a modified
environment.

Bobcats are no longer endangered, for the most part.  Endangerment
status for the Bobcat is generally only in localized areas, not
globally.

20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bobcat

The golden toad, extinct.  Very rapid and sharp decline around 1987
associated with the El Nino weather phenomenon.  But, still today,
there is a rapid and sharp decline in amphibian populations.
Amphibians are thought to be more vulnerable to climate change as they
depend on both aquatic and terrestrial climates.  That being said, not
to mention that wetlands sound like a great area for amphibians.

20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_toad  
20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Bufo_periglenes2.jpg  
20181208/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decline_in_amphibian_populations
