---
layout: post
title: Armored combat?  What exactly is warfare?
date: 2019-04-08 22:55 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

Tanks, armored combat.  Reading this through and really thinking about
it, somehow I just think of it as goofy.  Interestingly, chariots were
historically largely used as implements of war.

20190408/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chariot  
20190408/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tanks  
20190408/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armoured_warfare  
20190408/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western_Front_%28World_War_I%29

Seriously, what is the point of warfare if you are just going to armor
up tanks to protect the occupants, and then blast out more powerful
ammunition to attack enemy tanks?  The original idea with developing
tanks was to end a stalemate during World War I on the Western Front.
Originally, the idea was to launch a tank forward to plow through the
obstructions set up by trench warfare, and then infantry would follow
the cleared path and continue the attack in a more traditional manner.
Except when two such tanks from opposite sides would meet.  But, this
is merely scratching the surface, as ships, airplanes, and helicopters
are also used in modern warfare.

What is warfare as formally defined?  Now, now, sure there are lots of
formal definitions from pundits out there, but let me put for a more
technology modality neutral definition, hinging primarily off of
physics.

<!-- more -->

* Humans organize into possibly nomadic groups.  However, the primary
  defining characteristic is physical proximity within both space and
  time.  Although they may not have clearly defined physical
  boundaries across long periods of time, across a short period of
  time, their bounds are defined quite formally.

* With the definition of groups, humans always have an ingroup and an
  outgroup.

* With proper cooperation, outgroups and merge to be considered part
  of the ingroup.

* Without cooperation, these groups of humans can _collide_ if they
  exist in the same place at the same time.  Such a collision may be
  considered an invasion.

* If the collision causes physical damage to property or people, then
  it is considerate hostile and thus terrorism or warfare.

* The primary goal of ending a conflict is finding a way to stop the
  damage from continuing.  There are a number of strategies.

    * Symbolic invalidation: the property that can be damaged has been
      declared to no longer be covered as property.  Effectively, it
      is "thrown out in place," and damage to it is no longer of
      concern.

    * Fleeing the area.  If either party successfully moves away from
      the other, the damage can no longer continue.

    * Disabling the animated, moving objects that are sustaining the
      damage.  The modality and means to this end is not specified,
      and there is more than one way to do it.  However, the means to
      symbolic communication may not yet available as long as the
      parties remain outgroups to each other.  Methods of physical
      manipulation are generally applicable.  Confining the moving
      object within a cell is a general method.

    * Merging of outgroups into ingroups.  Although there might be
      conflict at first contact, quick remedial action to negotiation
      can eliminate subsequent damage.

With these definitions, there is no understanding of offensive and
defensive sides, only whether there is a violent conflict per se.  You
can only understand the offensive side as such if you can prove they
planned to enter the conflict.

Fundamentally, the ability to collide requires the ability to move
about.  With stationary objects, you cannot get collisions.  Also, the
ability to cause damage depends on the ability to manipulate the
world.  Simple collisions are the most basic means by which damage can
be caused, but additional implements for manipulating the world beyond
motion of can cause more extensive damage.

By these definitions, there is no way to "win" a war, only ways to end
a conflict.  But, there is an important key point here.  Inanimate
objects have "the right of way."  Naturally, if there are only
inanimate objects in an environment, damage is very unlikely to occur.
So, any animate objects being observed to sustain damage should be
secured within inanimate cells or otherwise disabled.
