---
layout: post
title: Why I hate the new Microsoft flat UI designs
date: 2019-01-29 11:53 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [random-software]
tags: [random-software]
---

Wow, every single time I see one of the new Microsoft flat UI designs
get upgraded, I think it just keeps getting worse and worse.  Some of
the early changes, they were laudable, but then Microsoft makes some
other not-so-opportune changes and things end up overall worse.  So,
what's the problem?  One of the things that people point out is lack
of customization in Microsoft's newer products.  In the past,
especially on Microsoft Windows, the look and feel was easily
customizable to any way that you would like it.  But on the modern
Windows, there is no room for customization.  Another problem is that
Microsoft's flat UI designs are simply not well executed.  You _can_
make a flat UI design that works well and is minimalistic, but
unfortunately for Microsoft, they have not put very much thought into
their flat UI designs.  So, although Microsoft's designs are
minimalistic, many of the design decisions are quite jarring.

The other thing is that people say that how well a UI looks is highly
subjective... but I can dispute that.  There are objective things in
Microsoft's implementation of flat UI that do not exist in other
party's implementations of flat UI, such as lack of contrast between
borders and overuse of colors.

20190129/DuckDuckGo why are microsoft icons so ugly  
20190129/https://www.quora.com/When-will-Microsoft-get-rid-of-the-ugly-flat-icons  
20190129/https://www.quora.com/Why-is-Windows-10-so-ugly  
20190129/https://answers.microsoft.com/en-us/insider/forum/insider_wintp-insider_personal/the-ui-is-so-ugly-an-there-are-no-options-to/d5d716ef-443d-49cf-a3ef-719bf65df0d6

<!-- more -->

Another aside.  Throughout the history of computer user interface
designs, there have always been many variations of user interface
designs.  Some came out as the best, others came out as the worst.  We
know, for instance, that the user interfaces of first Macintosh
Classic, then second Microsoft Windows 9x, were among the best of
designs.  By contrast, traditionally the worst of designs were
frequently found on Unix.  Fast forward to the present era, and well,
although Apple is still among the best of desgins, Microsoft has lost
their upper hand position and is now among the lesser of designs.

Interestingly, as I am looking at my macOS desktop, I realize that
although the internal application design of my Microsoft products have
degraded over upgrade cycles, their external icons on the desktop have
improved.  Previously, they were just an "O" for Outlook, a "P" for
PowerPoint, an "X" for Excel, and a "W" for Word respectively for the
Mac OS X app icons.  Now, although they still feature those single
letters, they also have additional graphics to the side indicative of
their functions: an envelope for Outlook, a graph and text for
Outlook, a spreadsheet for Excel, and a text file for Word.  Alas, the
icon design is a bit cluttered squashing these two design concepts
together into one, with each on one half of the icon.
