---
layout: post
title: Gaming systems, complexity, and who is willing to play
date: 2019-08-05 08:17 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Gaming, yes.  It's fun, right?  Well, if you are following carefully
about all the ins and outs about gaming, I think you can point out one
thing about virtual gaming and "serious gamers" in particular.  For
some games, there exists a degree of complexity that essentially
eliminates many potential participants.  The differences between PC
gaming, console gaming, and mobile gaming provide a good analytical
point.  Console gaming is more difficult to access than mobile gaming,
so the demographic of such gamers is correspondingly narrower.
Likewise with PC gaming, where you can assume due to the technical
complexities of building a high-end PC, can be an even narrower
demographic than console gaming.

Amidst the discussion of PC gaming, those games that encompass large
and complicated virtual worlds, such as World of Warcraft, can have
even narrower demographics.  But, in my opinion, a notable example of
an online game, technically a virtual "toy", that is most complicated
and limiting of them all?  Second Life.

20190803/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_Life

<!-- more -->

I first learned about Second Life through a Blender plugin that helps
you build custom 3D models for this system.  And that says it.  In the
MMORPG world, there are only a few game players who do spend time
messing around with 3D graphics directly, and most never touch it.
Here, we're talking a world where messing with 3D graphics is
considered more normal.  And, on top of that, there is a relatively
complicated system of finance and commerce inside the game, with users
playing a direct role in running the virtual businesses, rather than
simply using them from the consumer standpoint.  Admittably, with all
the tenets of what can be done in the Second Life world, the real
world demographic must be very narrow.

Now, in the "See also," there is one example of something similar, but
based around simpler technologies and not as demanding of creativity
of those involved.  The result?  It appears to be significantly more
popular and more widely adopted.

20190803/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smeet

----------

So, yes, with that discussion, let me discuss some of my own thoughts.
If you are building up a game (or "toy" for that matter) that is
getting increasingly complex, and you are starting to worry that it
might pass a technical complexity point where you'd be loosing
potential participants, what can you do to keep the complexity in
check?  The big thing I am thinking is trying to avoid complex virtual
manipulation.  2D graphical user interfaces are proven to be very easy
to use.  But, the moment you add the third dimension and expect users
to be manipulating objects directly within it, that scares away many
potential participants.  This even holds firm regardless of the
mainstreaming of the more advanced technologies that make 3D
manipulation easier.  The problem, as is seems, is that mainstream
computer users simply don't prefer that manipulation technology.
There's just something that still "clumbsy" about it like the light
pen versus the mouse.

So, suffice it to say, rule #1 that is pretty much set in stone for
now is that for your game to be accessible, it must not involve direct
3D manipulation in any way.  On top of that, even 3D graphics can be a
potential scare factor due to the implication of more complicated,
more serious gaming.

Yeah, yeah, I know, the geek inside me is saying "Come on, that's
boring!"  But yes, the truth is that many people are only willing to
entertain a maximum degree of excitement in their games.

The other thing, about virtual currencies.  Like I was saying, the
simplest thing is a "consumer" currency model, with a basic means for
earning and spending.  But, I digress, and admittably there are a lot
of accountants in today's economy, so for that reason, it is perhaps
more acceptable to entertain a more complicated virtual currency, and
you'll still be able to invite a lot of participants to the table.
Besides, this still works out well with the requirement for 2D
manipulation.
