---
layout: post
title: "The chemical elements of plastic, paper, cloth, and endocrine
        disruptors"
date: 2019-02-04 23:19 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi, mat-sci]
tags: [raspberry-pi, mat-sci]
---

So, about the whole endocrine disruptors thing.  What exactly is the
chemical composition of various different types of plastics, and what
leads some of them to have a greater propensity toward being an
endocrine disruptor than others?  First of all, let's start out with
the chemical composition of endocrine disruptors and the endocrine
system itself.

_Steroids_ are one of the primary signalling and controlling factor in
the endocrine system.  Steroids, as we know, have been extensively
studied and the chemical structural composition of them is well known.
Namely, the chemical diagrams of steroids are distinctively visually
recognizable by their inclusion of hexagonal and pentagonal loop
structures.  Specifically, steroids are defined to include three
four-element carbon rings and one five-element carbon ring.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steroid

Now, let's take a look at the chemical structure of a few known
endocrine disruptors.  Phthalates have a distinctive 6-element carbon
ring structure within them.  Although a phthalate isn't strictly a
steroid per-se in its chemical structure, we know that they do in fact
chemically interact with the endocrine systemm in a disruptive way,
and you can intuitively reason that part of that is due to their
similarity in structure.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phthalate

<!-- more -->

Now, don't be surprised that Bisphenol A has an even more similar
structure to a steroid, with two 6-element carbon rings.  Bisphenol S
is quite similar to Bisphenol A, also two two 6-element carbon rings.
Yet, due to the subtle differences in the chemical structure of
Bisphenol S, it is purportedly even more disruptive to the endocrine
system than Bisphenol A.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bisphenol_A  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bisphenol_S

Now, let's take a look at the chemical structures of our plastics.  To
start, polyethylene, polypropylene, and polylactic acid do not contain
5-element or 6-element carbon rings.  Furthermore, none of the
intermediates used to produce polylactic acid contain 5-element or
6-element carbon rings.  Acrylic (Poly(methyl methacrylate)) also does
not contain 5-element or 6-element carbon rings, but be forewarned
that additives are typically used with Acrylic.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyethylene  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polypropylene  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polylactic_acid  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acrylic_glass

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lactic_acid  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lactide

Polyethylene still has environmental caveats, though maybe this is
sheerly due to the volume of disposable polyethylene products
produced.  Polyethylene outgasses the greenhouse gases methane and
ethylene, especially low density polyethylene (LDPE), the flexible
formulation suitable for plastic bags.  These are _not_ endocrine
disruptors, though, and both essentially pose no risk to humans in
very low quantities.

20190204/https://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/polythenes-story-the-accidental-birth-of-plastic-bags-800602.html

Let's also overview some basic visual and structural properties of
these fairly safe plastic chemicals while we're at it.  Low-density
polyethylene (LDPE) and Acrylic are great for transparent plastics.
PLA can be transparent.  High-density polyethylene (HDPE) is
translucent instead of transparent.  Polypropylene has a crystalline
structure that makes its pure form white, but it can be made
translucent under certain formulations that might, for example,
incorporate some polyethylene.  Polyethylene is very vulnerable to
degradation from UV light, and polypropylene is somewhat vulnerable.
Polyethylene has a lower melting point around 120 degrees Celsius, but
polypropylene, polylactic acid, and Acrylic have higher melting points
around 160 degrees Celsius.  All of these plastics are thermoplastics,
so they are recyclable.  So far, this all sounds pretty good for 3D
printing, I must say.

Now, let's venture over to the more dangerous side of affairs: the
plastics known to contain or be able to readily transform into
endocrine disruptors or be carcinogens.

Polycarbonate contains two 6-element carbon rings.  In high
temperatures and high humidity, polycarbonate readily transforms into
Bisphenol A, a known endocrine disruptor.  It's no wonder then, that
during 3D printing, the fumes from polycarbonate have been reported to
cause quite the severe headaches, headaches that took several minutes
away from exposure to resolve.  Once endocrine disruptors are breathed
in through airborne dust, they readily enter the bloodstream.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polycarbonate

Polyurethane contains two 6-element carbon rings.  The burning of
polyurethane produces a variety of chemicals hazardous to human
health, and polyurethane spray foam emits some hazardous gases during
or after application.

> Decomposition from fire can produce significant amounts of carbon
> monoxide and hydrogen cyanide, in addition to nitrogen oxides,
> isocyanates, and other toxic products.[41]  Because of the
> flammability of the material, it has to be treated with flame
> retardants (at least in case of furniture), almost all of which are
> considered harmful.[42][43]

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyurethane

Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) thermoplastic, due to the inclusion
of phthalates, naturally contains endocrine disruptors.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyethylene_terephthalate

Polystryrene thermoplastic contains one 6-element carbon ring.  It is
suspected of being an endocrine disruptor, and its chemical precursor,
styrene, is a known carcinogen under elevated exposure.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polystyrene  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Styrene

Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) thermoplastic, due to the
inclusion of styrene, contains 6-element carbon rings.  Butadiene in
particular is a known carcinogen and a suspected endocrine disruptor,
even though it does not contain 6-element carbon rings.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acrylonitrile_butadiene_styrene

Polycarbonate is a very tough plastic with high impact strength.
Polycarbonate, polyethylene terephthalate, and polystyrene are
transparent thermoplastics.  ABS is an opaque thermoplastic.
Polyurethane is a thermoset plastic, although there are thermoplastic
formulations available.  Polycarbonate is very vulnerable to
degradation from UV light, and polyurethane and ABS are somewhat
vulnerable.

Ouch!  That's the price you pay for the stronger plastics.  You're
trading your safety from endocrine disruptors for increased material
strength.  For rigid plastics, there is a ready inventory of usable
plastics that do not contain endocrine disruptors.  However, many of
the materials chosen for their synthetic rubber-like quality contain
endocrine disruptors.  Polyurethane, ABS, SBR (styrene butadiene),
PVC.  This is something will cover in a later blog article.

JJJ TODO LINK!

A word on epoxies.  After construction, epoxies have properties
similar to thermoset plastics.  Bisphenol A and Bisphenol S are two
epoxies cover that are known endocrine distruptors.  So, are all
epoxies bad?  Well, checking out the Wikipedia article, it appears
that in theory, the definition of epoxies is such that do not
_require_ the application of harmful chemicals.  In practice,
virtually all of the commonly used chemicals used to either formulate
or work with epoxies pose some sort of high health hazard.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epoxy

Also, many synthetic polyesters are known to be environmentally
hazardous, if only for the fact that when used in clothing, the
microplastics that wash off are not biodegradable.  PLA, a
biodegradable polyester thermoplastic, does not have this problem, but
it is definitely more expensive than the alternatives.  The following
polyesters have 6-element carbon rings: polyethylene terephthalate,
polybutylene terephthalate, polytrimethylene terephthalate,
polyethylene naphthalate, Vectran.  In other words, the semi-aromatic
and aromatic polyesters.  Many of the Wikipedia articles of the
various polyester formulations are lacking on the environmental,
health, and safety impacts.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyester

One thing I didn't comment very much about is a detailed study of the
chemical breakdown and intermediates when the various plastics are
burned.  Many of the plastics are touted to release harmful chemicals
when burned, even though their pristine form is relatively harmless.
This is something that I would need to study further.

----------

So, now you wonder.  What are the chemicals involved in paper, cloth,
and photographic film?  Now, most of us know what this is quite
readily off the top of our head.  Cellulose, the main structural
component of the cell wall of plants.  Cellulose does not contain
6-element carbon rings: there are hydrogen oxygen molecules in the
6-element ring to break apart at.  Cotton cloth is almost pure
cellulose.  Cellulose acetate is used as the film base of photographic
film.  What about fleece/wool?  Fleece/wool is composed out of
proteins, so it's quite a bit different in chemistry.  Polypeptides,
amino acids, macromolecules, you name it.  Nylon thermoplastic is made
out of polyamides, which is a pretty simple carbon-based chemical
structure with no 6-element or 5-element carbon rings.  The gelatin
emulsion of photographic film is gelatin, of course, which is derived
from collagen, a protein that is the main structural element of animal
skin, bones, etc.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cellulose  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cotton#Fiber_properties  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cellulose_acetate  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wool  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protein  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amino_acid  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nylon  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyamide  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gelatin  
20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collagen

Now, we covered a lot of biomolecules there, but what about lipids?
Well, lipids don't appear to have as wide of a use for structural
materials, though they may be used for soaps and glues, we know.  Go
figure, lipids are fat, and you can't do body-building with fat alone.
However, the carbon chains of lipids can be conceivably broken down
and reformulated into useful parts of plastic molecules, just as fat
would get burned during exercise.  Ha, funny.

20190204/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lipid
