---
layout: post
title: Some interesting articles and random things today
date: 2019-03-31 15:28 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [twitter, random-software, random, legal, license]
tags: [twitter, random-software, random, legal, license]
---

So, I went looking around on Twitter and subsequent links from such
websites, typically news websites, and I've gathered a few interesting
things that I note here.

There are cliques on Twitter, and indeed clique-forming is touted as a
fundamental part of human nature.  It doesn't end after high school.

20190329/https://mashable.com/article/twitter-cliques-high-school-human-nature/#4.tyXMzwvPOJ

This is an interesting article about an Uber employee involved in
evaluating the Uber driver app and looking for ways to improve it.
When meeting with actual Uber drivers, they find it reassuring that
his test drive experience means he understands more of what are doing,
rather than someone who is only looking at spreadsheets at high.

20190329/https://mashable.com/article/uber-driver-app/#Vm3Q2PaAkaqj

Now this is really interesting.  Garfield phones washing up upon a
shore in France for over 30 years?  These were discovered to have come
from a lost container that crashed upon the shore during a heavy
storm.  Although the container fragments have been found, the garbage
pollution caused by it will keep washing up on short for several
decades to come, as the phones are scattered throughout the waters and
stuck upon miscellaneous rocks.

20190329/https://mashable.com/article/garfield-phones-france-coast-mystery/?utm_campaign=a-rr-culture&utm_source=internal&utm_medium=onsite#jgcGYiHdEsqo

<!-- more -->

Interesting, in a world where so many people have hundreds for friends
on social media, having a nemesis on social media is touted as a
positive alternative.  The idea is to keep competition with your
nemesis in a positive light, avoiding putting them down.

20190329/https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2019/03/how-choose-best-nemesis/585712/

Interesting open-source startup growing fast with good valuation.
What do they do?  They specialize in a system built on top of Apache
Kafka that expedites message passing between different large, dynamic
enterprise databases.

20190329/https://www.forbes.com/sites/alexkonrad/2019/01/23/open-source-unicorn-confluent-reaches-25-billion-valuation-three-years-after-hiring-its-first-sales-rep/#e1f8df815e2c

You know the the great amphibian decline in recent years that I've
mentioned before?  Well, it looks like we now know one of the key
culprits clearly.  The culprit is a bacterial disease named Bd,
_Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis_, that attacked nutrients in frog
skins, sub sequentially causing a fatal heart attack, and spread
raedily through the waters, especially aided by faster modern
intercontinental shipping and transportation methods.  This is a
super-killer disease that knows of no niches in terms of amphibian
species it attacks and is quite persistent in the environment once it
reaches its destination.  Our understanding is that it emerged in
Asia, then spread to the rest of the world through transportation for
international commerce.

20190330/https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2019/03/bd-frogs-apocalypse-disease/585862/

Now, this is what we've been waiting for.  Discussion and past events
about cameras in airbnb rentals.

20190330/https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2019/03/what-happens-when-you-find-cameras-your-airbnb/585007/

This is interesting.  Why has homework in America followed the pattern
it has?  Much of it was due to inertia... if parents remember doing
homework one way, they think that their children should do it exactly
the same way.

20190330/https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2019/03/homework-research-how-much/585889/

This is a pretty interesting article.  An explanation of how technical
debt doesn't really exist... the problem is that the term is
overloaded and when people start talking about it, they quickly don't
know what they are talking about because they are thinking about
different things.  This article goes into detail about what these
different specific things are.

20190328/https://kellanem.com/notes/towards-an-understanding-of-technical-debt

Native GUI apps in Golang?  Don't be too fooled by this article...
note that it touts using the software of its own site's name for
building a Golang GUI.  The idea here is to build something "entirely
new"...  so you'll be disappointed by the experience if you use the
so-named software.  But yes, there are Golang bindings to more
mainstream native GUI library software.

20190328/https://fyne.io/blog/2019/03/19/building-cross-platform-gui.html#about  
20190328/https://fyne.io/

Now, this is another one of those things "you've been waiting for to
happen."  Someone fired from a company later finding a way to hack the
company in a denial-of-service manner.  They got prosecuted for the
damages.

20190328/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/03/20/steffan_needham_aws_rampage_prison_sentence_voova/

AWS has its own backup made by Amazon?  Third party cloud backup
vendors, watch out!  By all means this is a big hit for them, though
they still have their niche use case of touting multi-cloud
compatibility, which Amazon does not, at least not yet.

20190328/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/01/17/aws_amazon_backup/

IBM has long been known for harboring lots of diversity, but in recent
years, it's gone the Medtronic way of being hostile to senior-level
employees and terminating them under the false guise of poor
performance, when the real determinant of their termination was merely
their physical age.  IBM is trying to reinvent itself as the more
modern, more hip, more agile, more stereotypical tech company that is
comprised out of lots young white males and lots of allegations of
discrimination.  Meanwhile, the U.S. military is considering expanding
the demographic restrictions of the selective service beyond young
males.

20190328/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/03/27/new_bim_lawsuit/  
20190328/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2018/07/03/ibm_langley_age_discrimination/  
20190328/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2017/02/09/ibm_workfromhome_cull_companywide/  
20190328/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2018/03/22/ibm_age_discrimination/

Noteworthy is that Intel as a company has a few allegations of
discrimination, but I'm not quite sure if the scale of what is going
on is comparable to IBM.

20190331/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2018/04/02/who_had_intel_in_the_discrimination_lawsuit_pool_congratulations/

This DXC Security company is facing off some hard financial cuts in
its future plans, with questions about cutting security certifications
and training budget called into question.  How are employees going to
stay relevant?

20190331/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/03/26/dxc_security_spending/

Britian's security investigation into Huawei's smartphone software
upon the suspicion of nation-state backdoors injected into there has
found more security issues at fault due to the general software
development methodology than any clandestine government operative.
Clearly they realize that they are not holding any other vendor to as
much scrutiny as they would be holding Huawei at this point, so
additional investigation into other vendor software is needed.
Noteworthy is that the build system is in bad need of improvement,
especially for the capability of reproducible binary builds.

20190331/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/03/28/hcsec_huawei_oversight_board_savaging_annual_report/

Now, this is really interesting.  I'm kind of surprised to learn about
this.  An Oracle spokesperson touts that most open-source database
software was not really open-source after all.  Why is this?  If you
look at their development model, you'll find that most of the
purportedly open-source database software is really only developed by
a single party.  This is quite unlike more "true" open-source projects
such as the Linux kernel, that clearly has a number of different types
of developers from several companies contributing to it.

But in the case of database software, it appears monopoly rule is the
nrom.  And, especially in light of modern cloud developments, the
develpoment methodology of these parties has gotten astir.  These
monopoly developer parties are seeing that the cloud operators have
much bigger customer bases, and they are purportedly getting paid much
less than they previously would have in the pre-cloud world.  So, they
are one-by-one shifting their software licenses to be more
proprietary.  This is getting many parties upset.  Ultimately, this
appears to be a battle that the newly minted database proprietors are
going to loose.  The cloud pundits are stating theat they
fundamentally don't understand the cloud revenue model: the cloud
revenue model is to amortize and reduce hardware operating costs,
while the open-source software model is meant to do likewise for
software.  The newly minted database proprietors simply don't
understand their target market.

Meanwhile, the Oracle database pundits are pointing out that their
existing and new strategies are quite aligned with the trends of the
time.

20190331/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/01/17/oracle_exec_opensource_vendors_locking_down_licenses_proves_they_were_never_really_open/  
20190331/https://www.theregister.co.uk/2018/08/23/redis_database_license_change/
