---
layout: post
title: Lots of useful vintage computing and vintage Macintosh information
date: 2019-10-18 23:31 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [vintage-computing, mac-classic]
tags: [vintage-computing, mac-classic]
---

Here is a variety of useful information I've gleaned from the 68kMLA
forums, all rolled into a single blog article.

----------

Want to know about what kind of PDS card is inside your Macintosh SE
using software?  Try installing TattleTech or SlotInfo from NewerTechs
Gauge series.

20191020/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/57374-asante-video-card-in-se30-apple-iigs-monitor/

Someone is looking for drivers on this CNET CN490e SCSI to Ethernet
adapter, unfortunately they're not getting much luck.  Also, it's not
on the Vintage Apple drivers website.

20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/29792-driver-for-cnet-cn490e-scsi-to-ethernet-adapter/

Interesting story on repairing a Hard Disk 20 by lubricating the
stepper motor shaft and giving it a good whack.  Also there's lots
more great information on diagnosing and maintaining the HD20.

20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/31552-apple-hard-disk-20-repair-a-success-story/

<!-- more -->

----------

Here is some useful information on connecting monitors to vintage
Macintoshes, although it focuses on later generation vintage
Macintoshes.

20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/57611-mac-monitor-database/  
20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/48994-connecting-68k-macs-to-lcd-monitors/

----------

Good tip on cleaning floppy drive, just insert a special floppy disk
with filter paper with alcohol in place of where the magnetic opening
is, and that will clean up the read/write heads.

20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/58069-bricking-a-floppy-disk-drive/

Interesting, FlashPath SD to Floppy Disk adapter, almost the dream
device except that it doesn't replace a true floppy disk, it requires
special drivers so it really only works on particular PCs.

20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/58084-flashpath-sd-to-floppy-disk-adapter-actual-floppy-disk/  
20191018/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FlashPath

Great advice here on disk backup software.  Disk Copy, and yep, you
bet it, Retrospect, have been mentioned as good choices.  Retrospect?
Oh wow, I have that on some floppy disks I've salvaged that were
otherwise going to be thrown out.

20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/57985-file-size-explosion-when-one-hdd-icon-dragged-onto-another/

----------

Now, this is interesting.  A particular vintage Macintosh had an
unknown icon in front of an empty connector cutout the size of a mini
DIN port?  Well, this turned out to be an expansion card opening for
the ill-fated pre-release Paladin combined modem-printer-scanner-fax
machine.

20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/57983-mystery-icon/

----------

So, I was looking at the 68kMLA trading post forum, and found
something interesting.  Alas, that area is accessible to members only,
so no public access for general Internet users to this.

broken/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/57264-dallas-warehouse/

Wow, I got news of an awesome Computer Reset warehouse in Dallas,
Texas full of all kinds of vintage computer gear.  Some very hard to
find items are abundant with multiple copies in that warehouse.

20191018/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rvM82T3C2Ik

For a while, it was on a limited open schedule for vintage collectors
and folks to help pick out artifacts for a computer museum.  How did
this come into the purview so quickly?  The original owner was having
health problems and wanted to sell the property, which is why
everything had to be gotten rid of with such short notice.  Alas, the
sad ending to to this is that the owner passed away short of having
the property completely emptied of the vintage gear.  The site is now
permanently closed until further notice.

Is there any other news on Computer Reset?  Unfortunately, no.  The
last we hear is the permanent closure of the warehouse, then silence.

20191018/DuckDuckGo computer reset texas  
20191018/https://forum.winworldpc.com/discussion/11314/texas-computer-store-computer-reset-liquidation

This is an interesting article about a literal "barn-find" Apple II.
According to the story told by the seller, it was stashed away with
livestock feed and some mice built a nest in it.  Very nasty, corroded
from mice pee and poo, quite a deal to get cleaned up.  Not to mention
about the risk of hauntavirus.  Stay away from the dust, wear a mask
and gloves, blow it off with compressed air outside, stay upstream of
the wind, wash it with water thoroughly.  And don't bring it into the
house until it has been thoroughly cleaned and quarantined outside for
a while.  Otherwise, you can literally get a cockroach infestation
inside your home when the ambient temperature causes a roach egg to
hatch.

Also, I found some good tips for preserving things.  Store with bounce
sheets, rodents can't stand to be near them.

20191018/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/56142-legit-barn-find-apple-iie/
