---
layout: post
title: Updates on rubber decay and preservation
date: 2019-12-16 21:29 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [mat-sci]
tags: [mat-sci]
---

So, on the question of rubber decay.  What exactly are the specific
circumstances that differentiate between "dry rot" and "wet rot"?
Well, it's tough to say from what I've learned from my [previous
sources]({{ site.baseurl }}/blog/2019/10/14/rubber-failmods), but I'll
try to put together the best information I can, with the help of one
additional source.

20191216/DuckDuckGo rubber dry rot polymersolutions  
20191216/https://www.polymersolutions.com/blog/why-does-rubber-dry-rot/

First of all, temperature cycling decreases the wear and tear on
rubber.  Especially extreme temperature cycling does its toll.  If you
have really high seasonal hots and really low seasonal colds, then you
shouldn't expect rubber to last too long in such an environment.
These temperature extremes take their toll due to the _thermoset
plastic_ nature of rubber.  In particular, they snip the long rubber
polymers shorter, which either causes rubber to become gooey and
sticky ("wet rot") or dry and brittle ("dry rot").  Oxygen exposure,
UV light exposure from the sun, and high temperatures also take their
toll.

But how do you know what the ultimate fate of rubber is, dry rot or
wet rot when exposed to the extremes?  Well, suffice it to say, I
believe the end effect depends on the particulars of the rubber you
use.

<!-- more -->

For example, I had two rubber objects in an second floor bedroom in a
house with a south side window (hence more exposure to solar heating).
Under these conditions, they experienced a number of temperature
cycling stresses that they wouldn't have experienced had they been in
the basement, for example.  However, both such pieces were placed in
semi-closed containers that restricted, but didn't eliminate, exposure
to air flow, and indeed there is more air flow in an upstairs room of
a house to keep the temperature regulated than, say, in the basement.
One piece failed in a "dry rot" mode, the other piece was degraded in
a "wet rot" mode, but only on the surface.

Additionally, I also had a brass-like piece of metal in the same area
as the "wet rot" rubber piece.  The metal was noticeably tarnished,
but only on the surface, and this was easily cleaned and rubbed off.

Natural rubber latex is more sensitive to higher temperatures than
synthetic rubber, so chances are if you have some rubber that is
failing in a "wet rot" mode, it is more likely to be natural.  But
"dry rot" rubber failures, that is more characteristic of synthetic
rubbers.  Not to mention, that for some synthetic rubbers in
particular, they are made flexible by plasticizers that can leak out
into teh atmosphere.  Without the plasticizers, they would otherwise
be a hard and brittle plastic, i.e. what they end up turning into.

Some other interesting notes, some rubbers that are more like natural
rubber latex may have additives mixed in that, when the rubber is
worked and stretched, they make their way to the surface to help
protect the rubber.  But, when the rubber is not used, they stay
within the rubber, and the rubber fails to get its protection that it
would otherwise get under regular use.

But, a good closing note.  Beyond computerized temperature monitoring,
one cheap way to assess the climate stability of an environment for
preserving rubber is to place a metal object in it that would tarnish
when exposed to a sub-optimal archival atmosphere.  If after a few
years it shows tarnish, chances are that rubber objects stored in the
same climate would become either gooey or brittle after that same
period of time.  But, if the metal preserves its shine, so would the
rubber likely better preserve its stretch.

Particularly, in the case of certain kinds of computer electronics
like vintage Quantum hard disk drives commonly found in vintage
Macintosh computers, any "wet rot" of rubber that can happen at all is
an issue because it can cause the read/write hard drive head to stick
to the rubber bumpers in the disk mechanism.  Luckily, if you are
unsure of the archive-worthiness of a particular storage location, you
can use a piece of metal as a simple and cheap indicator.
