---
layout: post
title: Sources of old schoolwork papers
date: 2019-01-02 06:39 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi]
tags: [raspberry-pi]
---

Nowadays, I don't get very much in the way of old schoolwork papers to
stock up on to use for paper mache projects, so I had to resort to
junkmail as an alternative paper source, one that I personally
tongue-un-cheek refer to as a "renewable scratch paper source."  Yet,
I am still learning new things, despite not being in school.  So, let
me reflect.  What were the sources of old schoolwork papers?  Old
schoolwork papers can be classified into three big categories:

* Class handouts
* Assignments
* Examination

These large categories can be further broken down as follows.

* Class handouts
    * Syllabus
    * Slides/notes
* Assignments
    * In-class assignments
    * Homework assignments
    * Writing assignments
    * Art projects
* Examination
    * Permitted exam notes
    * In-class exam
    * Take-home test

<!-- more -->

Particularly noteworthy is that putting these materials on paper is
largely an artifact of taking classes in person.  If you don't attend
class in person, you can't get class handouts on paper.  Rather,
you'll end up getting PDF documents of class handouts of the class is
taken online and the instructor desires to hand out documents similar
to printed paper.  Likewise, writing assignments are submitted online
by means of PDF or word processor document upload.  Nowadays, even
when a class is taken in person and a hard copy is handed in on paper,
there is often times also an electronic submission so that the graders
can more easily use automated tools to check for plagiarism.

For homework, if there was a lot of external commercial involvement
from companies of the likes such as Pearson or McGraw Hill that went
into the curriculum, there may be a proprietary web app that homework
is worked inside of.  In this case, there is no industry standard data
format to contain the details of the homework assignments after the
course has ended: the sole purpose is to have the student work through
exercises in the short-term and assign a grade.  By contrast, if the
instructor largely prepares their own curriculum and homework
assignments, the electronic submission is typically a PDF, word
processor document, or some other industry standard form.

As it turns out, although there is a such thing as some online classes
involving art projects, honestly my personal experience is that hardly
anyone who has a college-level education ever takes those classes.
Most classes that produce art projects of any form as a graded
assignment are done so on paper or some other physical medium and are
often done only in very early school education.  Correspondingly, most
early school graded art projects choose to use physical media for ease
of use, and graded digital/electronic art projects are typically only
part of a middle-school or higher level curriculum.  Especially, the
more advanced multimedia forms such modular synthesis, 3D computer
graphics, professional post-production compositing and effects, and so
on ard hardly ever covered by most earlier schools' course offerings.

Examination is traditionally one of the toughest parts of education to
administer, and the challenges likewise extend to online classes.  The
main concern with examination is preventing cheating, either from
consulting unauthorized reference manuals during the exam or by
copying identical answers to identical questions from a classmate's
paper during the exam.  Sometimes online classes may even resort to
special in-person exams in the interest of preventing cheating.
Sometimes for in-personal exams, a personally prepared sheet of notes
is permitted, in which case this must almost always be done on paper,
not an electronic source, again for the interest of preventing
cheating by limiting the scope of information available.  Therefore,
even in a world of largely electronic course-work and education,
examination is still a significant source of school paperwork.
