---
layout: post
title: Silicon-based lifeforms?  Material Science lowdown.
date: 2019-03-10 22:15 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [mat-sci]
tags: [mat-sci]
---

One of the interesting subjects that comes up in science fiction is
that of silicon-based lifeforms.  On Earth, carbon is the backbone of
most lifeforms as we know it.  Silicon is also in the same column of
the periodic table, so it shares some similar properties with carbon.
Conceivably, it should then be possible that silicon-based lifeforms
to exist in other places in our Universe, right?

Well, maybe, but a closer study of our Earthen materials science
knowledge seems to state otherwise.  Think about a lot of materials
that are made out of carbon, and think about a lot of materials that
are made out of silicon.  One thing that is definitely agreeable about
carbon is that it is a very chemically reactive element: many
carbon-based materials can readily burn and combust.  Wood, paper,
cotton, plastic, wheatpaste, milk glue, charcoal, petroleum, they all
burn quite readily and can contribute to the fuel of a wild fire.
But, think of silicon-based materials by contrast: glass, ceramic,
concrete, sand, water glass.  All of these materials evoke the sense
of inherently nonflammable construction.  The fact is, silicon simply
isn't as reactive of an element as carbon is.

<!-- more -->

That being said, that does not by any means say that you can't do
chemically interesting things with silicon.  Quite the contrary.  With
the right creative ingenuity, humans have figured out quite a number
of interesting things that can be done with silicon-based substances.
We've figured out how to make silicon-based adhesives, semiconductors,
transistors, integrated circuits, photovoltaics, and nowadays the very
element itself evokes the sense of the core element of all the brains
of our modern smart electronics technologies.  The fact that silicon
is a relatively non-reactive element makes these technologies all the
more interesting, the fact that these constructions are very far
displaced from what we know of all other life on Earth, and are
therefore immune to biological attacks such as biological viruses.

But, when you really think about this, when you really really think
about this, there is something even more interesting going on here.
We have successfully figured out how to build intelligent animated,
robotic machine forms _almost entirely_ out of nothing but rocks and
minerals.  Conveniently, the exterior bodies of all modern electronics
can be constructed out of aluminum, glass, and ceramics, all of which
are rock-derived.  Photovoltaic solar panels?  Nothing but a highly
evolved rock that generates electrical energy.  Solid lithium-ion
batteries with embedded ceramics?  Nothing but a highly evolved rock
that stores electrical energy.  Electronic motors?  Nothing but a
highly evolved rock that converts electrical energy into mechanical
motion.  Integrated circuits?  Nothing but a highly evolved rock that
can think, see, display images, or do many other of a myriad of
complex and intelligent activities.

Now, here's the really big key to realize.  Carbon is not a very
abundant element on the Earth's surface.  The total number of
lifeforms on the surface of the Earth is practically limited by the
available supply of carbon on the Earth.  Our rock-based creations, by
contrast, suffer no such limit.  The limit of their existence is
merely but the limit of the available rock supplies on this planet,
which are inherently much more abundant than those supplies of carbon
on our planet.  The machine creations we have developed can easily
outnumber us, and for the most part, that's a good thing: it means
that every single human on Earth can easily have a multitude of robots
at their disposal to do all their work for them.  It means that
everyone will be able to live in a smart home of their own, and that
nobody will ever have to be homeless or bound to a dumb home.  But, it
also means that the robots could easily revolt take over the world,
and humans wouldn't pose even the slightest threat to our future
robots because they would be so fewer in numbers.

So, yeah, those are some important things to think about.  This simple
fact has the good, the bad, and the ugly all rolled into it.
