---
layout: post
title: Reflections on 3D scanning, WeWork, and newer ways of doing things
date: 2019-02-07 20:05 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [home-network, 3d-scanning, 3d-scanner]
tags: [home-network, 3d-scanning, 3d-scanner]
---

So, one thing that has become markedly obvious to me, learning about
WeWork (in case it wasn't obvious enough!), is that the world we live
in is always markedly divided into, at least, two different cultures:
those who want to keep doing things the old way, and those who readily
adopt the new way of doing things.  But, the picture is not so simple
as this may paint it.  Often times, there are _entire communities_ of
people who _only_ do things the old way or _only_ do things the new
way.  That being said, I happen to live in a neighborhood where there
is a good mix of people living in somewhat older and somewhat newer
ways of life, even as next-door neighbors.  Clearly, I'm not in the
middle of a WeLive community where the administration and most of the
residents are skewed toward only the newest way of doing things and
living their lives.

The oft-repeated adage is "the grass is greener on the other side."
Indeed, I sometimes think that to myself.  Wouldn't things be so much
better for me be if I was living in a community where people only did
things the new way, the way that embraces modern technology to the
greatest extent possible?  And indeed, this is where I realize the
folly in such a way of life.  When you live in a community that _only_
does things the new way, you can too quickly forget about the other
communities that exist that only do things the old way.  For those of
us who have gotten far enough to read this article, clearly I need not
explain the perils of living in a community that only does things the
old way.

<!-- more -->

Indeed, I have to say, we can even be so specific as to name certain
communities, as of 2019, that are skewed to one side or the other, and
communities that run a better balance in between.  "Silicon Valley,"
California is clearly a community that is sharply biased toward the
new ways of living.  New York City, New York, also has some stronger
biases toward new-style living.  Oklahoma has quite a number of
pockets of old-style living communities.  Minneapolis, Minnesota has
some new-style living, but not so extreme as the other mentioned
cities.  Minnesota, as a whole state, seems to have quite a good
balance between old-style living and new-style living.  On one hand,
the old style doesn't get too old, and on the other hand, the new
style isn't monopolistic or overly futuristic.

So, wow.  I seem to have almost strayed off the original intended
subject, that of 3D scanning.  But indeed, I actually haven't.  3D
scanning is only but a piece of the puzzle of this larger picture.
The specific question that I have been asking myself over and over
again with 3D scanning, is who will adopt it?  Who can I expect to be
willing to adopt 3D scanning technology, and who can be written out of
the picture as those who will never be interested?  WeWork provides a
very strong example of the kinds of customers willing to readily adopt
any kind of 3D scanning technology.  If you think about the most
futuristic, highest-tech, property management companies, 3D scanning
is an excellent fit.  If, by contrast, you think about builders and
people who want to keep doing things the old way, 3D scanning may seem
like an unnecessary extra to them.  Ultimately, your goal as a
personal user of 3D scanning technology is to walk the bridge over the
gap between these two disparate communities.
