---
layout: post
title: Visit libregraphicsworld, discuss some interesting articles
date: 2019-02-22 18:22 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [random-software]
tags: [random-software]
---

So, recently I decided to visit the Libre Graphics World website again
and see if I found any interesting articles.  Of course I found a few
interesting articles, so I will discuss them briefly and my thoughts
here.

First of all, the article on the recently open sourced render manager
from Google and Sony Pictures Imageworks teaming up.  Here we had some
proven software that was used for many feature films that was
proprietary until recently.  However, there were also recently created
open-source render managers from the likes of the Blender Foundation
and others.  On one hand, it's good to know that some important
software is being published as open-source.  On the other hand, it is
a bit of a bummer that it had to be delayed to so late, enticing
others to do a little bit of rework.

The second article, on what was originally supposed to be a
lightweight graphics editor, is interesting.  Originally it started
out completely from scratch, but it borrowed the name of PhotoFiltre
by using the name "PhotoFiltre LX."  This created problems of elevated
expectations from previous PhotoFiltre users who were constantly
comparing the new software to the old one, and the author really
didn't like having such rigid constraints.  Hence, the author renamed
the software to have more freedom in terms of community members.
Originally the software was simple for quite some time, but soon it
added more advanced features and functions.  Particularly noteworthy
was that there was one long-time commercial contributor that resulted
in the author going from only working on the project as a hobby to
working on it part-time.  Part of the advisory was to use Qt for the
windowing toolkit in preference of GTK+ as that toolkit was a better
choice for more commercial software... in light of recent GTK+ API
instability and controversy.

<!-- more -->

On one hand, I really like how there are always new software projects
in the libre software world.  On the other hand, sometimes the turmoil
of an existing established software project only lasting short term
and ending abruptly can be quite disruptive for, well... hobbies.  As
a hobbyist, I might work on something longer term at a slower pace, as
opposed to a professional who would work on something shorter term at
a faster pace.  But, if you look at the opportunity of libre software
as mainly being able to onboard many newcomers quickly, efficiently,
and economically, there is definitely nothing wrong with the turmoil.

Also, I found the Openshot video editor which some prefer as a good
open-source video editor.

20190222/http://libregraphicsworld.org/  
20190222/http://libregraphicsworld.org/blog/entry/google-and-imageworks-team-up-on-opencue-open-source-render-manager  
20190222/http://libregraphicsworld.org/blog/entry/photoflare-interview-2019  
20190222/https://www.openshot.org/
