---
layout: post
title: "Clay electronic cases, the chemistry of rocks and minerals,
        and sodium silicate glue"
date: 2019-03-01 21:06 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi, mat-sci, 3d-printing]
tags: [raspberry-pi, mat-sci, 3d-printing]
---

On the subject of building cheap, simple, handcraft, non-flammable
electronics cases suitable for prototyping, there was an important
oversight of mine that I was thinking about for quite some time but
did not yet discuss in detail: clay.  At the outset from an arts and
crafts standpoint, clay is simply Playdough's heavier, harder, more
difficult to work, and more traditional counterpart.  Alas, on the
subject of flammability and fire resistance, the differentiation is
obvious.  Just as the ground beneath your feet does not burn, dried
clay does not burn, ever.  Clay that is baked into ceramic is
especially fire resistant.  A thermite reaction does nothing to melt
or burn through a ceramic gardening pot.  Intuitively, if clay or a
substance of clay is used correctly, it can also be used as an
adhesive for paper and cardboard, in place of the typical combustible
carbon-based adhesives.

20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clay  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clay_minerals

Clay, fundamentally, is composed out of "clay minerals."  Some of
these clay minerals, i.e. Kaolin group minerals, are used in the
production of Portland cement.  Clay contains water, and when the
water is dried out, the clay hardens.  When clay is heated in an oven,
permanent changes occur to it that turn it into _ceramic_.

<!-- more -->

20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaolin  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montmorillonite  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nontronite  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saponite  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illite  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chlorite_group  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sepiolite  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attapulgite

As it turns out, although I learned about rocks and minerals in one
class of my previous school education, and I learned about chemistry
in other classes, somehow I never really learned about the two put
together.  So, here I will put the two together, and do a quick review
of the previous subjects where applicable.

20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mineral  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicate_mineral  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicate  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Obsidian  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volcanic_glass

Rocks are made out of one or more minerals.  Minerals are the more
pure form and material of rocks, which can either be described by a
specific chemical formula, or a range of chemical formulas with minor
variations.  Certain kinds of minerals may also incorporate additional
chemical impurities into their structure.  But, the fundamental rule
at play here with the chemistry of minerals is that of the most
abundantly available elements and compounds.  Silicate minerals
compose approximately 90% of the Earth's crust, and according to the
book _The Mystery of the Periodic Table_ by Benjamin D. Wiker, a
little over 98.5% of the Earth is made up of only eight elements:
iron, oxygen, silicon, magnesium, nickel, sulfur, calcium, and
aluminum.  "Oxygen and Iron by themselves make up about 65% of the
earth."  In addition to the Earth's dry crust, we literally have
oceans full of salt water.  Add hydrogen and sodium to the mix and
you've pretty much covered all the elements used in most minerals.
Despite the abundance of carbon in your own body, the places you live
in, and the materials you work with, carbon is actually not that
abundant on the Earth's surface as a whole.

You can look at some of the previously mentioned Wikipedia articles on
clay minerals for more information, but you need not be surprised that
many minerals are composed predominately out of the elements that I've
mentioned just previously.

So, now the revelation...

I thought I heard of a such thing as "silica glue."

20190301/DuckDuckGo slica glue  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sodium_silicate#Adhesive  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metasilicate  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sodium_metasilicate  
20190301/DuckDuckGo sodium silicate cement flammable  
20190301/https://www.artmolds.com/artmolds-sodium-silicate.html  
20190301/http://fosterproducts.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Childers-PDS-CP-97-R0915.pdf  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calcium_silicate  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vermiculite

Ah, yes, indeed there is something similar to what I was thinking.
Sodium silicate, also known as water glass, can be used as an
adhesive.  Especially advantageous is that it has been successfully
used for applications such as building insulation fusion where
non-flammability is required.  Its constituent elements are sodium,
silicon, and oxygen.  No carbon is included.  The anions are often
polymeric, so despite the exclusion of carbon, it can function similar
to more familiar glues nonetheless.  Even better, sodium silicate is a
proven adhesive used in the manufacture of cardboard.  Sodium silicate
does not work well for gluing paper together, though, as the adhesive
is hard and brittle.

Application of sodium silicate glue is simple.  Apply the paste by
brush to the components to be glued together, and join the components
within 5 minutes of application.  Wait one hour for drying and
hardening time.  To clean up excess, simply use warm soapy
water... before hardening is complete, otherwise it cannot be removed
from some surfaces such as glass.  Sodium silicate is soluble in
water, so it can be washed away from some surfaces even if it has
hardened.  The commercial adhesive CP-97 that I linked to is actually
a fibrous adhesive that gets stronger as it ages.

Also, be careful with sodium silicate because it is alkaline and can
be quite an irritant to the skin and eyes.  Wear waterproof gloves and
safety goggles while handling, and wash thoroughly after handling.
"KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN" is stated by one supplier's website.
After opening the storage container for the first time, sodium
silicate has 18 months of shelf life.  Because sodium silicate is
soluble in water, if it gets wet after it's been applied, it can form
a strong alkaline solution that can be quite an irritant to someone
who touches it.

20190301/DuckDuckGo water glass  
20190301/https://www.lehmans.com/product/water-glass-liquid-sodium-silicate  
20190304/https://www.britannica.com/science/water-glass

Interestingly, you can make your own sodium silicate relatively easily
by mixing silica gel beads, used as desiccants for electronics, and
drain cleaner, which contains sodium hydroxide.  Wear excellent eye
protection, a face shield, gloves, and work in a well-ventilated area
since this involves a caustic ingredient.  Crush the gel beads, mix
water with the sodium hydroxide, and gradually add the gel beads into
the mix, stirring and heating.  Do not let the solution over-boil.
Consult the following references for more precise details.

20190301/https://www.thoughtco.com/make-sodium-silicate-or-water-glass-608271  
20190301/http://www.instructables.com/id/How-to-Make-Sodium-Silicate-Water-Glass/  
20190303/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silica_gel

Also, when wet sodium silicate is applied to egg shells or the surface
of cured concrete, "it chemically reacts with calcium hydroxide or
calcium carbonate to form calcium silicate hydrate."  Again, calcium
silicate is often used in fire protection, owing to its
non-flammability, so naturally it also works well for creating
non-flammable electronics cases.

Note that borax is a good fire retardant additive for paper and
cardboard.  Potassium silicate can also be used as a fire retardant,
but maybe it is less preferable to work with as it is strongly
alkaline.

20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borax  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Potassium_silicate

Speaking of sealants, what is the chemical composition of the typical
glaze used for pottery?  Fundamentally, this glaze is glass, so the
chemical is a silicate.  Word.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ceramic_glaze  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitreous_enamel

----------

So, after all this discussion, I thought of it as a good idea to
summarize an inventory non-flammable earthenware.  That is, materials
composed out of the predominant materials available in the Earth's
crust.

* Sand
* Vermiculite
* Gravel
* Rocks
* Granite
* Clay
* Ceramic
* Concrete
* Plaster
* Glass
* Quartz
* Portland cement
* Sodium silicate
* Calcium silicate
* Aluminum
* Glass wool

It really is quite simple... but it's surprising that, due to our
human exposure with many carbon-based constructions and lifeforms,
it's so easy to forget about this alternative world of abundant
chemicals beneath our feat.  It's also interesting to think about the
sharp contrast between typical chemical inertness of silicon-based
compounds versus carbon-based compounds.  Carbon-based compounds burn
readily, but silicon-based compounds are curiously inert against
combustion.  Perhaps that partially explains why, despite the
plausibility of silicon-based lifeforms, only carbon-based lifeforms
are known to exist on Earth, and our animated, silicon-based,
computerized creations are distinctively the product of intelligent
human construction.

These metals are not very useful in their pure form, but can be quite
useful when used in alloys.

* Iron, its pure form is prone to rusting
* Magnesium, its pure form is prone to burning

Interestingly, reading about thermite on Wikipedia notes that under
the correct conditions, metals can burn quite similar to how wood or
gas burns.  So, for sure, chemical compounds are very instrumental in
making a highly reactive pure element chemically inert, relatively
speaking.

20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermite  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Thermite_residues_%28railway_welding%29.JPG

What about fiberglass?  Alas, don't get confused here... the term
fiberglass is commonly used to refer to a plastic that is reinforced
by the addition of glass fibers.  Glass fibers together as a pure
material is most commonly used in "glass wool" as home insulation.
Glass wool insulation hurts the hands to the touch, so it is not
commonly used in many other materials, enough said.

20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiberglass  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiberglass_molding  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glass_wool  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glass_fiber  
20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiberglass_mesh

----------

Here is some related information that I found when searching for the
previous article information, but it is not quite on the same topic.
Geologists classify clay versus silt by particle size.  Loam is a
mixture of clay, silt, and sand, and it is very useful for
agricultural soil.  It can also be used for building construction.

20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loam

Geotextiles?  This is just a fancy name for the applied use of
textiles to geo-scale projects.  No special materials are used that
were not previously covered.

20190301/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geotextile
