---
layout: post
title: Long discussion on why I like vintage computing
date: 2019-04-15 17:58 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [vintage-computing, windows]
tags: [vintage-computing, windows]
---

So, I was chatting with a friend, and the topic came up that I was
working on getting Windows 98 running in a virtual machine, with full
features.  But, the key question was this.  "Why are you working with
Windows 98 rather than something more moderm?"

So, I came about and drafted up a lot of text responses, and
ultimately my final response was much shorter.  But, for my own sake,
here are the full details.

Ah, good question, but my answer must be even more tactful.

First of all, there are some things that really haven't changed about
computing from a user's standpoint since the 1990s: general operating
system architecture, C/C++ compilers, scripting languages, general GUI
operation, basic web architecture, and so on.  BUT, all of these
things were accomplished using a fraction of the system resources we
use to accomplish the same tasks today.  So, in that sense, some of
the things from the 1990s ARE modern, but they somehow manage to do so
using a lot less system resources.

<!-- more -->

That's one thing, I think, that can be impressive if you can
understand it in detail: out of all the changes that happened between
then and now, which ones were merely arbitrary, versus which ones were
truly innovative and useful?  Increasing the default stack sizes in
your standard C libraries is a mundane change... you won't get as many
stack overflows, and it will still run okay on your more modern
computers with beefier memory, but it is by no means a necessary
change for ALL software.  By contrast, re-architecting embedded
software development workflow to better separate building the compiler
from building the standard C library is a more compelling change: if
it were more widely adopted back then, it would have had even more
compelling productivity improvements back then than is the case today.

I think the really impressive thing about 1990s software and
computing, though, is the cultural dimension.  We had this period of
time that was quite unique in the history of human society.  In the
middle of a booming U.S. economy, and rapidly developing Asian
economies, we had computers that, very visibly, transitioned from
beepy 8-bit machines to full spectrum audio and color graphics.  How
did simultaneous those changes affect those who were living and
working in that time?  There's interesting things you can find
everywhere.  And, due to the technology wirlwind happening at the
time, it does take a greater amount of effort to tap into seeing what
was happening in tech at that time, compared to the early 1980s or
2000s... so you also have a curiously interesting puzzle to work on to
visualize it in the modern era.

The tech world of the 1990s was definitely unusual.  Today's tech
world (2000 to present) is more in the usual cycle of tech, being more
closely mirrored with the pace of the early 1980s, 1970s, and maybe
also earlier back to the 1950s.  Although the tech of the 1990s is
more similar to the tech of today, I personally find that the
practical pace of innovative development today is more in line with
that of the earlier decades.  In some sense it is kind of interesting
to think about this bigger picture... we have more engineers and
better communications today than ever before, but challenges to
reaching great innovation are getting even harder, so it all evens out
to the pace of the earlier decades, where the challenges were easier,
but the pace slower simply due to less engineers and slower
communications tech.
