---
layout: post
title: "To those who are leaving the vintage computing community..."
date: 2019-08-03 00:20 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [tour-de-force, vintage-computing, mac-classic, apple-ii]
tags: [tour-de-force, vintage-computing, mac-classic, apple-ii]
---

Dear ex-vintage computing fans,

Vintage computing, ah, yes, fun isn't it?  Well, at first, yeah, it is
fun, but once you really get into the meat of vintage computing,
pretty soon, you realize you are quickly operating in a community that
is fast becoming short handed.

In the old days... okay, fine, to be quantitative and unambiguous, in
the 1970s and 1980s era, there was an unusually large number of
people, even including especially young children, who were eager to
learn technology and work in that field.  This resulted in the 1980s
and 1990s boom of professional electrical engineers and computer
programmers, who quickly decided to drive the computer revolution and
work at companies of the like of Apple Computer and Microsoft.  As a
result of this generation who lived through tremendous innovation
within their lifetime, there was a once avid community of vintage
computing enthusiasts.  Many old-timers viewed the old computer
technology as monumental, themselves and their tech career being
indebted to the old technology that came before them.  Therefore, they
saw it as high value to maintain the old computers and some time to
relive the old way of computing.

<!-- more -->

I myself am indebted to this community of old timers who were
passionate to keep things living on into what was the present, but is
now the past of the 2000s era, right up until the year 2010.  Thanks
to their due diligence to documenting their know-how and sharing their
knowledge with new community members, I was able to get up and running
on some particular vintage Apple II hardware pretty quickly, and use
it as a tool to backup old data from an old black and white compact
Macintosh SE.  Finally, after the fact, I too became enthusiastic
about learning about the old vintage Apple II computing hardware.

But, as I am now seeing become more evident as time goes on, people
like me are an utmost minority.  As time goes on, I'm seeing the
community of old timers shrink.  That is, the community of people who
have their knowledge of vintage computing from actually living during
the era and working with the technology in its original time frame.
The statement on its own is, of course, inevitable, but that is not
the only thing at play.  Not only is the community of people versed in
the old technology shrinking, but a similar effect is also happening
with the community of modern tech workers.  How is that?  I will
explain the details of that, which requires quite an intricate
explanation.

Overall, the world population is growing, and the population of tech
workers in absolute numbers is likewise growing.  But, the way this is
happening is primarily through a change in demographics in the tech
population.  If I were to succinctly state the primary differentiator
in demographics, it is this: In the old days, people got into
technology because they were eager to learn and work with it,
regardless of the economic payouts.  Nowadays, people are primarily in
the tech business for the money.

Now, this is where the differentiation between cultures becomes
critical.  The old order of engineering that was based off of
"free-will" choice to participate as a passion, that had a strong
U.S. American presence.  The modern era of those who are in it for the
money, that has a strong Asian presence.  Europeans, well, they were
historically, and still are, somewhere in the middle, so they have
stayed a bit more stable over the decades, though still subject to
fluctuation.  Obviously, as it turns out, the "free-will"
participation proved to be quite unpredictable, being left to chance.
Though U.S. American participation had a "boom" in the 1970s and
1980s, it had a "bust" following in the 1990s and 2000s.  However, in
per capita terms, arguably the per capita level of innovative
technology workers in 2020 is about on par with that of 1920.  Not
bad, still pretty good, but it could be better.

But the big question to ask, is why?  Why were Americans previously so
excited, in terms of a per capita basis, learning about technology in
the 1970s and 1980s?  For as much as we know, that is just as good a
question as a mystery.  All we know is that it did happen in the old
days, and the old-timers of tech are now a valuable but finite
resource of the overall tech talent pool that is running out.  The
best we can do is plan in advance for the predicted drought of some
types of tech talent when we see other types of tech talent are
booming in supply, and plan accordingly.

I will miss the people with the old order of tech talent, and I am sad
to see the knowledge fade away from the mainstream purview of the tech
profession, but 'tis the nature of the tech world, and we must learn
to move on with limited access to skilled human resources in the old
areas, with full knowledge of the fact that when I say "old," it is
not in fact obsolete.  The knowledge in areas like electrical
engineering is used as practiced every day by modern computers at the
lowest levels, albeit with the fact that less and less people still
understand how it works.  In addition, the fact is that the electrical
engineering knowledge to understand modern computers keeps getting
more and more advanced.

The vintage computing at its fullest community sure was fun, but
looking forward into the future, we're going to have to limit our fun
more and more to a "think small" approach, while the old order
technology that we work with in our vintage computing hobby becomes
more and more of literally, an artifact of the "giants who came before
us," of which we are literally incapable of working at an even,
eye-to-eye level with what the giants of the past did.

Until we meet again,

- quorten

----------

p.s. Key takeaway: money talks.  If you really do _need_ people to
still be in the field, keeping the job well-compensating will ensure a
steady flow of supply to meet demand.  But, if you make the
U.S. American-style statement of pursuing your "free-will" passions
for your career, the supply of talent is left to chance, and naturally
it will fluctuate over the decades.  This is perfectly normal with any
"free-will" decision, and it can be seen in other areas too: religion,
marriage, divorce, and so on.
