---
layout: post
title: "More on how car culture affects how people get to know new
        people in"
date: 2019-07-25 12:25 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [motor-vehicle]
tags: [motor-vehicle]
---

So, I have linked in a previous blog article, to a Wikipedia article,
that car culture reduces people's random social occurrences in public
spaces, which was once an important way that people would get to know
new people.  So, how do people tend to get to know new people in the
midst of car culture?  So, now imagine this.  In car culture, people
typically travel from one boxed building to another, enclosed in their
car in the spaces between, so social interaction on the road is
largely off limits.  So, you'd imagine that people would only socially
interact when their in the box, at their destination.  Or, in the case
of marathons, sporting events, and the like, when they're on the
field, which is basically but a bigger box with void space in between
the points.

So, let's go about on an Internet search and see what we can find...
yup, basically the results, though specifying in more detail, fits the
abstract picture that I've painted.  It's all about the boxes.

Lifehacker, yes, that's a good site, it had a pretty good article on
the effects of ads on people.

Oh wait, one mention, walking groups.  That one is not a box.  Another
one, the army.  Not really a box in the same sense.  You could argue
that these are simply moving boxes.  Ingress and Pokemon Go, those
ones are interesting, not quite boxes there.  Biking groups.
Photography clubs share similarity to walking clubs.

<!-- more -->

20190725/DuckDuckGo what is the best way to get to know new people  
20190725/https://lifehacker.com/the-best-places-to-meet-new-people-1512814587  
20190725/https://lifehacker.com/why-its-so-hard-to-make-friends-after-college-and-wha-488975744  
20190725/https://lifehacker.com/5953703/how-to-be-sociable-when-you-dont-feel-like-it

The question then, from a philosophical standpoint, is how do you
eliminate the social void space between the boxes.  For one thing,
there are old solutions to this, like urban walkable communities that
were out and about before car culture could be a thing.

But, overall, you have it.  Most of what people are saying and putting
down, they're "boxes."  Once you get to the box, it all happens in
there, so to speak.  Lots of meetups and clubs, that's for sure.

What about online meetups?  That, similarly, is a box, albeit a much
smaller one, contained within a fraction of the volume of some
computer server.  Then there is tons of routing and switching
equipment to rendezvous the communication messages.  A box, but with
some very long skinny dendrites that reach out to the points to
connect them together.
