---
layout: post
title: DuckDuckGo and content farms
date: 2019-04-05 11:58 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

DuckDuckGo, yes that is an interesting subject.  Namely, it is the
primary search engine I use for gathering information for this blog.
So, what does Wikipedia have to say about it?  For the most part, what
it says today is what it said a few years ago.  But, the popularity
and traffic numbers is the new thing.  In this year of 2019,
DuckDuckGo has reached 1 billion searches per month.  And quite a
while ago, it previously took a full year to get to 1 billion
searches!

So, what was the secret of DuckDuckGo's growth success?  By all means,
it appears that some of the early traditional billboard advertising
helped it inch up a little bit.  But, what really helped it grow by
leaps and bounds was its coverage in mass surveillance scandal news as
an alternative to the evils promulgated by companies like Google.
_That_ is what really made DuckDuckGo take off.  The second thing that
really made DuckDuckGo take off was its full web privacy toolkit.
Again, this is best understood in context of the mass media mass
surveillance scandal news.

Interestingly enough, the inclusion of DuckDuckGo as an option in
Safari and Firefox browsers didn't appear to have as significant of an
uptick as the uptick that came in response to mainstream media news.
So, the secret of DuckDuckGo's success?  Start out by planning for a
known gap in the market.  Get a small community around your product.
Then, wait for a kicker subject to come into the purview of mainstream
media.  Then, jump with traditional advertising and marketing within
the mainstream media advertising outlets.  Then, cash in on the growth
to come.

<!-- more -->

20190405/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DuckDuckGo  
20190405/https://duckduckgo.com/traffic

DuckDuckGo manually removes websites they believe to be "content
farms" such as eHow.  Oh, really?  That's interesting.  I've heard of
eHow a long time ago in 2006 for elementary school English research
paper writing classes and visited it a few times back, but I've never
really wondered why I haven't seen the site since then.  Mainly, the
only reason why I used the site was because it was "some site other
than Wikipedia," but had the school teachers known this, that eHow was
essentially a "content farm" that churns out a large number of
low-quality results mainly to rank high in search engine results and
cash in on the advertising revenue profits, then perhaps Wikipedia
would have been regarded as a more credible source.  But, anyways,
that's why we don't see eHow in search results anymore, not to mention
that we'd probably prefer Wikipedia by default over eHow even at the
time.

20190405/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_farm  
20190405/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EHow  
20190405/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Panda
20190405/https://webmasters.googleblog.com/2011/05/more-guidance-on-building-high-quality.html  
20190405/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_penalty
