---
layout: post
title: Ubiquiti Networks and the DC lead-acid UPS I was looking for
date: 2019-10-29 02:29 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [home-network, battery-backup]
tags: [home-network, battery-backup]
---

So, recently I was looking around at Ubiquiti Networks.  Are they
really all that great?  Well well, I was not short of impressed when I
looked at their product offerings in greater detail.  In addition to
their excellent Wi-Fi access points and IP cameras, they also provide
point-to-point visible light communications, switches, routers, and a
UPS with only 24 V DC output.  Their net gear runs U-boot and Linux,
via the AirOS firmware image.  So, it's pretty much what I want,
except that is proprietary software and proprietary drivers sprinkled
in there.

Alas... there may be a _caveat emptor_ in their UPS offerings.  They
may only provide battery discharge, not battery charge, and it is
expected that chemistry-specific equipment (lead-acid polymer, etc.)
be used for charging.  Also, unlike the seasoned UPS vendors, this UPS
does not appear to provide any surge protection at all, not even the
equivalent of a PC "surge protector" power strip.

20191028/https://www.ui.com/  
20191028/https://dl.ubnt.com/datasheets/edgemax/EdgeRouter_DS.pdf  
20191028/https://dl.ubnt.com/ds/EdgePower

Unfortunately, Ubiquiti Networks started off with bad faith when it
came to providing the corresponding source code to their software, and
it took quite a bit of push before they finally provided it as they
must per the GNU GPL license terms.

<!-- more -->

20191028/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ubiquiti_Networks  
20191028/https://web.archive.org/web/20170430232455/http://libertybsd.net:80/ubiquiti/  
20191028/https://web.archive.org/web/20170524235100/http://libertybsd.net/ubiquiti/

Alas, with that key information in mind, I had a better way to conduct
my UPS search.  Search for "DC UPS" and you'll get much better results
that are likewise geared up for network use, rather than generic
appliance use that provides 120 VAC power output.  The key here is
that the DC voltage output will tend to be relatively high, and it is
assumed that you will use DC-DC converters to get the lower voltages.

This particular one does run off of lead-acid batteries.  It is not
made obvious from the data sheet, but if you read in about the type of
battery connectors used, binding-post connection, it's pretty obvious
it can't be lithium-ion, by contrast.

20191028/DuckDuckGo ups dc output  
20191028/https://www.seipower.com/24vdc/  
20191028/https://www.seipower.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/2U24datasheet2.pdf

Now, I just ahd to check back at the NETGEAR site... as it turns out,
NETGEAR still has strong business offerings, lest I worry that they
became too consumer focused.  No, Ubiquiti isn't replacing them any
time too soon.  NETGEAR probably still does have better PoE switches,
but if you also want a router function built-in, you may have to go
with Ubiquiti.  The NETGEAR flex PoE is really nice, though.

NETGEAR also has some recommendations for power redundancy too.  They
point to another manufacturer from their site.  Please note: these are
not UPS units!  They just provide for redundant power sources.

20191028/DuckDuckGo netgear redundant power supply  
20191028/https://www.netgear.com/business/products/switches/modules-accessories/rps5412.aspx#tab-resources  
20191028/http://www.downloads.netgear.com/files/GDC/datasheet/en/RPS5412.pdf  
20191028/http://www.optimal-power.com/  
20191028/http://www.optimal-power.com/redundant.html
