---
layout: post
title: "When your \"rubber eraser\" is not rubber,
        plastic is \"synthetic rubber\""
date: 2019-01-19 13:12 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi, mat-sci, 3d-printing]
tags: [raspberry-pi, mat-sci, 3d-printing]
---

Nearly 10 years back, I built my own stand to put my handheld solar
charger on at my home indoor environment when I am not using it on the
go.  As part of the construction, I used some pink erasers to hold it
at the desired angle.  Fast forward to today, and those pink erasers
are now looking white and are quite hard, dry, and brittle.  What
happened?

Well, first of all, clearly those erasers are some sort of "fake"
rubber.  If you've ever had a "rubber band" that "dried up" and became
brittle, you probably know what happened given your chemical
knowledge.  The "rubber band" was actually, literally, _plastic_, and
_plasticizers_ were added to it to make it softer and more flexible.
Over time, those plasticizers leaked out into the atmosphere which
caused the band to loose its flexibility while also making an
environmental pollutant in the process.  Now, you're telling me that
the material is turning white?  Well, then we have yet more
information at our disposal.  We know that PVC plastic is a white
powder, and pigmets are added to it to make it other colors.  Indeed,
the vast majority of historic "synthetic rubbers" may have been made
out of PVC and laden with plasticizers given that many of these old
kinds of things were prone to the same fate when exposed to the
elements.

How does natural rubber latex compare to synthetic rubber?  Natural
rubber latex is generally softer and more gummy than synthetic rubber.
If you've ever used a "gummy eraser" before, that's more similar to
how an eraser made out of natural rubber latex would feel like and
work.

<!-- more -->

On a related note, your "latex free" rubber bands may actually be more
dangerous than you think.  By substituting natural rubber latex with
plastics laden with plasticizers, you may be exposing yourself to more
endocrine disruptors.  Endocrine disruptors negatively affect
everyone, but latex may only negatively affect who are allergic.
Also, that eraser dust that you sometimes accidentally breathe in when
using a pencil eraser?  Well, well, that's an easy and ripe path for
those endocrine disruptor phthalate plasticizers to enter directly
into your blood stream, similar to how inhaling lead vapor (i.e. from
soldering with leaded solder) can cause lead to enter directly into
your blood stream.  Yeah, you know it's bad for your health because it
hurts if you inhale eraser dust, so you try to avoid it, but maybe you
were unaware of exactly how dangerous inhaling eraser dust can be.
Likewise, the reason why car tires are classified as hazardous waste
and must be disposed of properly is because they _are_ made of
synthetic rubber, possibly laden with endocrine disruptor plasticizers
that can cause serious environmental and human health damage if
released improperly to the environment.

In the old days, people previously used real, natural rubber latex a
lot more often in construction.  Some political history can explain
the primary motivation why people switched by far and large to
synthetic rubbers.  Before World War II, Goodyear had a large rubber
tree plantation in Vietnam where they produced a lot of the rubber
used by industrialized countries in less favorable climates for
growing rubber trees like North America and Europe.  During World War
II, Japan seized the area and basically cut off the rubber supply to
northern countries.  At this time, these countries had to look for
alternative sources for rubber, and the one that emerged was synthetic
rubbers produced from petroleum.  Ever since then, the vast majority
of rubbers have been synthetic rubbers, and nowadays synthetic rubbers
are generally preferred to natural rubber latex because it can be made
to be harder and stronger.  Also, the softness can be adjusted simply
by adjusting the proportion of plasticizers injected into the
manufacturing process.
