---
layout: post
title: Protective equipment for soldering and welding
date: 2019-02-16 23:35 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi]
tags: [raspberry-pi]
---

One of the problems I've identified with me not getting around to
practicing soldering as frequently as I like is due to lack of
protective equipment.  Can I practice soldering late at night?  What
if I make a mistake and burn myself?  By far, I must admit that my two
greatest concerns with soldering are the fumes and the potential to
burn my hands on the soldering iron.  Also, reading around, some
people always recommend you wear a respirator while soldering, so why
not?

Okay, now what about the gloves.  What kinds of gloves should you wear
when doing soldering?  First of all, many people do not recommend
wearing gloves due to the lost dexterity.  Fair enough, but if you are
a novice at soldering, you don't have much dexterity to begin with, so
that's not really something to worry about.  Of course experts are
much less likely to burn themself on soldering, even if they are doing
it late at night.  But, anyways, for those who do prefer to wear
gloves, they recommend wearing "welding gloves."  They are very
comfortable, and they will stand up to the heat if you accidentally
touch the tip of your soldering iron.  Your main concern with gloves
is that they must be sufficiently heat resistant, because having a
burnt glove stick to your burnt hand is not very comfortable.

20190216/DuckDuckGo what kind of protective gear to wear when
  soldering gloves  
20190216/https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/167265/soldering-protective-gloves  

<!-- more -->

So, here is my updated list of recommended equipment for soldering.

* Safety glasses
* Respirator
* Heat resistant gloves, i.e. leather gloves or welding gloves

In my opinion, simple leather winter gloves can be sufficient.  The
main point is that you want adequate protection from accidental
momentary contact.  Sure, with the thickness of typical leather winter
gloves, if you hold the soldering iron on one spot of your leather
winter gloves for a while, it will probably heat up enough to burn
you, but presumably you wouldn't "accidentally" leave the soldering
iron tip on your gloves for that long.

This is a nice welding safety FAQ here.  Obviously, many of these more
advanced protective gear recommendations don't apply if you are only
doing small soldering work on a tabletop.  For example, leather boots
are not needed for protection during tabletop soldering.

An important note is that cotton is _not_ recommended for welding
work, unless it has been treated to be fire retardant.  Wool is rugged
against heat, though.  Of course, with soldering, since you don't need
to worry about causing paper to burn from momentary contact, so the
same with cotton clothing you may be wearing.  The scale makes all the
difference.

20190216/https://www.lincolnelectric.com/en-us/education-center/welding-safety/Pages/personal-protective-equipment-faqs.aspx

Okay, so what about the respirators?  What kind of respirator should
be used for soldering?

20190216/DuckDuckGo what kind of respirator soldering protection  
20190216/https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/161139/which-are-the-safety-recommendations-for-soldering  

Now, this is where things get quite interesting.  When you do
soldering, there is actually no risk of the metals vaporizing and
getting into air.  The lead will stay put where it is, so don't worry
about breathing in lead.  The smoke you see from the soldering is from
the rosin core flux.  Okay, so what about the smell from the soldering
iron warming up, that smell that I don't like?  Well, there is not
conclusive evidence on the Internet about discussion on this, so I'm
just going to assume it is either iron oxide somehow being vaporized,
or it is ozone somehow being produced, although I reckon that it
doesn't really smell like ozone to me.

Matter of fact, there really is no long-term occupational risk
associated with those people who have done a lot of soldering.  By
contrast, one occupational risk found with other occupations is
"whitefinger."  What is that?  Working with tools that vibrate a lot
for long periods of time can cause the onset of random disruptions in
blood vessel flow, long after having performed the work.  So, remember
to be careful with vibrating tools.  Of course, the risks are much
less when such tools are used as a hobby rather than professionally.

20190216/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibration_white_finger  
20190216/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raynaud%27s_syndrome  
20190216/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypothenar_hammer_syndrome

Now, this is a random but interesting fact I've found out about
soldering.  Are you heating up a new soldering iron for the first
time?  Make sure you are careful to tin the tip as soon as you
possibly can, otherwise when the tip oxidizes without any tinning,
your soldering iron is practically useless.  Also, do not try to
scrape the oxide off with a screwdriver, because if you nick through
the iron coating on a copper core tip, you would have ruined your
soldering iron.

20190216/DuckDuckGo solder iron warm up smell oxidize  
20190216/https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/365486/soldering-iron-tip-turns-black-after-first-use-and-wont-melt-solder
