---
layout: post
title: Why aren't vintage televisions valued like vintage computers?
date: 2019-10-26 10:03 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [tour-de-force]
tags: [tour-de-force]
---

Yes, I have been working with vintage computers a bit, and by
extension, vintage television technology for the sake of using it as a
display.  This question has come up several times in my mind.  Why
isn't vintage television technology valued the same way vintage
computers are valued?  I think it comes down to how much real work
most people got done out of the old technology.  What is most
surprising is that intage computers, despite there not being as
massive of a market for them, seem to be a lot more abundantly
available than vintage televisions.  By all means, it is definitely a
difference in attitude.

A lot of innovation has happened in the computers, and they have
drastically shaped the world as we know it today.  But it is also true
that the innovation television technology, though slower, has also
drastically shaped the world as we know it today, so really, why
aren't they valued as much?  When you really pry and prod apart at
this a lot, yes, the answer is clear, it is the differences in the
attitudes of the _people_ behind the tech that is what matters, not
merely the abundance of the tech itself at the time when the
technology was prime in current manufacturing production and
commercial sales.

<!-- more -->

The average television watching person, at the time, was doing so as a
means of being a tremendous time waster.  In retrospect, they take no
interest in their past of being a tremendous time waster.
Additionally, they are a tremendous money water.  They have a tendency
to throw away working tech and buy new stuff just because they
personally are too disorganized.  They rely on paying other people to
keep their stores organized, but the moment they make a purchase,
unpack, throw away labels, tags, and boxes, they've essentially
dropped the merchandise down into an environment which is a one-way
ticket to the trash.  Everything that goes into such a messy and
disorganized environment, the inherently sloppy person only responds
by randomly throwing everything into the trash.  Of course they're not
going to self-organize, that someone else's responsibility!  And once
they've thrown away things that they really do need, that's how the
cycle starts over again.

Ultimately, the mindless consumer really lacks any memory of the past,
and when the primary goal is to seek entertainment, they don't really
marvel in the technology itself used to deliver the entertainment.
Hence the relative lack of interest in vintage TV tech.

Now, let's compare the vintage computing community.  These are people
who worked, at the time, in highly complex environments.  Writing
computer software is no joke, you've got to be really organized, every
memory allocation must be matched by a memory free, lest you spawn
memory leaks that cripple your system to a halt.  These people also
develop an intimate understanding of the machine's technology itself.
You're talking an entirely different crowd of people even when they
were at their prime time in the present.  In hindsight, when what's
modern becomes vintage, these people are probably going to also be
much better off financially since their degree of organization
probably extends throughout their entire lifestyle, and likewise they
are much more organized in how they deal with their old computers,
selling them rather than junking them.

So, there you go.  Time wasters of the past will waste time in the
future, and time savers of the past will just keep going.  They don't
stop early.  Okay, that's about as much as I can say about the
subject, and hopefully you can get the idea.
