---
layout: post
title: "Explaining libre software in a whole-world of users
        perspective"
date: 2019-07-09 23:05 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [tour-de-force]
tags: [tour-de-force]
---

Free software, free as in freedom.  Libre software... ah yes,
venerable concepts in their own right, I like the cause, and more
important than the raw financials, it is important that the spirit be
supported, but sometimes I feel that it is really hard to explain and
inform with non-technical folks.  But, after I thought about this for
a while in recent times, I believe there is a solid "whole-world"
framework, as I put it, in which the concept can be unambiguously
explained to everyone.

Perhaps one of the best and oldest examples of a complex machine under
private ownership by a non-technical person that is the motor vehicle.
For most car owners, if they are asked about the responsibility of the
maintenance of their motor vehicle, their response will be indicative
of the concept that ultimately, it is somebody else's responsibility
to maintain the motor vehicle.  They personally are only responsible
for following the orders of when to bring in the vehicle for its next
maintenance or recall.

Now, perhaps this is a very American culture way to bring up this
example, as not everyone around the world has as many cars as the
United States does, but let's put it this way.  In areas of the world
where there is not as much car ownership, their smartphone _is_ their
vehicle.  In developing nations that haven't had much of a history of
car ownership, it is also their first such vehicle at that.

<!-- more -->

In any case, bringing up the subject from this standpoint, one thing
is clear.  Before you can discuss the advantages of libre software
over proprietary software, you need to know someone's stance on the
maintenance of their gadgets.  Unlike us geeks, most people don't see
computers as anything special, they're merely yet another type of
"consumer electronics", and their attitude toward consumer electronics
forms an overriding influence on their opinion of computers.  Matter
of fact, the concept of programmability of computers is a vague and
foreign one in today's consumer world, just as the concept of
reprogramming the firmware of a 1990s television or VCR was quite a
foreign one to computer people of the time.  Back then, the
programming of those devices was the realm of electrical engineers,
not software developers, but today, the software running on those
devices is much more similar to PC software of the 1990s, and
therefore, much more intuitive for "software people" to program.

So, the first question to ask.  What is your view on craftsmanship in
regard to consumer electronics?  Is the idea of reliability,
availability, serviceability, security, and honesty in implementation
important to you?  For many people, they simply take a "don't care
approach."  Ultimately, it's not important to them.  Gadgets are
cheap, you can just buy a new one if it doesn't work, can't you?  It's
only when the problems get really severe do they start to notice.  If
they had to buy a new one right now, they'd clearly be wasting a ton
of money, so they're going to file a complaint about it.  Ultimately,
they had to buy a new one anyways, but when they received their new
gadget, they found out that the old one was tracking them all across
the Internet, "phoning home," and the new one they ordered
automatically configured itself to their personal accounts and
everything, without asking.

Another deeper question goes beyond the individual standpoint and
opinion and looks at the larger community.  Despite gadgets being
purchased individually, the development of their underlying
technologies happens at a community scale.  Ultimately, as it turns
out, there is no real choice and options in the computer world, it's
all based off of what the one big community develops and uses
together, which is then replicated across all devices on the mass
market.  So the other, higher-level question.  Do you guide your
purchasing decisions not just based off of what you want, but also
based off of what your neighbor wants too?  Again, most people take a
"don't care" approach to this, but perhaps it is a cultural
phenomenon.

Speaking of motor vehicles, there is also quite an interesting dynamic
that has happened from the cultural standpoint.  It's generally
understood that farmers have a different cultural standpoint toward
their machines than typical consumers do.  For most farmers, it is
really important that they are able to service and repair their own
equipment.  And traditionally, it had to be.  In the past, most
farmers lived too far away from town to be able to easily get someone
else to do equipment servicing and repair for them, so often times,
except for the most difficult of servicing and repair, it would come
down to themselves to service and repair their equipment when it
breaks.  City slickers and suburban folks have a much different
standpoint, of course.  With it so easy to get someone else to do it
for them, the question is why not?  Matter of fact, why even bother
learning how that machine works?

So, point in hand, modern trends toward eliminating the serviceability
of modern consumer electronics have went largely unchallenged in most
of society, and that same trend also extended unchallenged toward the
electronics in consumer motor vehicles.  But, when companies tried to
extend that same tried-and-true methodology to farm equipment, there
was a very strong backlash, and many farm-heavy jurisdictions enacted
swift legislation to protect "the right to repair."  Indeed, this is a
very different culture from standard consumer culture.

Another point in hand is that in modern times, it appears all across
society, there has been less interest in craftsmanship.  So, that's
another reason why finding people who care about quality in this
regrad are tough to come by.

----------

So, after that discussion of background information, I can structure
up hierarchical questions as follows.

1. What is your cultural viewpoint?  Is it that of an individualistic
   culture community culture?  The technical reality is that modern
   computers are developed via a community culture.

2. What is your view on craftsmanship in regard to consumer
   electronics?  Is the reliability, availability, serviceability,
   security, and honesty in implementation important to you?  How
   about from the community culture standpoint?  Do you think it's
   important that your personal financial decisions supports the
   desires of neighbors for craftsmanship?

3. All of today's consumer electronics are, in fact, computers.
   Computers, unlike electronics in general, are defined to be
   programmable machines.  Do you think the ability of other people to
   program and upgrade programs on your computers is important?  Do
   you think it is important to be able to program your computers
   yourself?

4. Since you've mentioned you are familiar with programming...  Do you
   think it is important to be able to view the source code of the
   software that was pre-installed on your device?  Do you think it is
   important to be able to install modified versions of this source
   code?
