---
layout: post
title: "Lessons learned on house logs, a tour of common human
        weaknesses and limitations on human ability to attain ideals"
date: 2019-09-27 22:34 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [inven-sys, home-network]
tags: [inven-sys, home-network]
---

So, I tried an experiment to improve communications around my house by
the use of a very simple and dumb web application to allow folks to
post notifications when they make changes to common things, like
eating a meal, bringing groceries into the kitchen, starting the
dishwasher, taking the trash out, etc.  It was aptly named "House logs
for dummies!"  What did I learn?  A lot.

First of all, let's discuss teams versus groups.  What's the
difference?  A team has shared responsibilities and shared outcomes
across all members, whereas a group has independent responsibilities
and outcomes.  Also, both a team and a group must have three or more
members.  With only two members, a the operating dynamics of a "duet"
are quite different.  Additionally, teams and groups have their
advantages and disadvantages, a team is not necessarily superior to a
group.  And, guess what?  A family need not operate as a team,
operating as a "group," possibly with one "duet" (the parents)
suffices.

Groups and teams, of course, have differing communication dynamics.
Suffice it to say, the communications of a team need to be more
extensive and intensive to satisfy the requirements of a team, that
they can succeed when they have a shared fate, and thus they need to
communicate enough to effectively perform as one.  And that's where
things start to pull apart.

<!-- more -->

In the business world, there are some times when a team dynamic really
is a requirement in order to succeed in some disciplines.  No so under
default assumptions at home and in family life.  In family life, by
contrast, the requirements are much more minimalistic for many of the
members, for example the children of the parents.  And this
intuitively make sense.  By minimizing the requirements, family
structures can maximize the number of people who may qualify to be
part of the family, including young children who cannot be expected to
perform to higher standards.  But it also means that such a family, on
its own, cannot be expected to perform to the requirements set by the
business world and free market competition.  Although some families
are capable of acting as strong teams, many cannot.

Although it sounds like I'm about to draw a dismal conclusion of my
experiment, hold on, there is actually some magic to this.  Even
though the members of the group were personally disinclined to act as
a team, I have successfully found a way to partially step around that
limitation.  The oft-repeated adage is that "humans are creatures of
habit."  With the right tools and technology, you can work this aspect
of human nature to your advantage.  If you train the humans involved
to build a habit into communicating with a computer, then you can get
some of the necessary communication input required to operate as a
team.  But, this is key.  The logic for executing actions based off of
that input is all sourced inside the computer itself, rather than
resting in the hands of the humans who, otherwise as team members,
would directly receive that information and act accordingly.  Of
course, that being said, this approach has its obvious limits.
Namely, any time a course of events deviates from an established
habit, the humans, unwilling to adopt the team mindset, will regress
back to independent group members, and the computer will not get
adequate input to make the smart team-oriented decision.

This is where habits alone cannot succeed: any time there is a
deviation from the normal conditions under which a habit worked well.
The only true way to perform well in adversity is to have adopted the
proper mindset, attitude, or virtue.  When the conditions are not
exactly identical, what are the core principles by which your habitual
actions were performed?  How can you adapt your actions to achieve the
same core principles even when the environmental conditions to not
match those required to apply your habit?

So, the bigger question.  How do you go from building habits in other
members to building mindsets, attitudes, or virtues?  "Buy-in" is the
key word.  First of all, one thing that is definitely worth
reiterating.  It is pretty easy for people to build habits.
Therefore, to persuade others to build a habit does not require as
much buy-in as to build a mindset.  Second of all, well this is a much
bigger question than I am willing to answer in this blog article, but
I'll give some quick summary hints.  You need to build "mutual
purpose" and "mutual respect" with the other skeptic members, one
important idea is to make them "feel safe."  But the other thing, well
what keeps them willing to keep going on the mindset thing?  One
approach may be to keep reminding them, at the same time preserving
mutual purpose and mutual respect.

So... all that being said.  One of my ideas of setting up the system
was to be able to test out some simple but efficient business
operation tools at home.  Yeah, that's really a "think big" mindset,
and it's not something that can be expected out of just anyone.  You
may know many family members who are content with "thinking small."
The problem with change of mindset, attitude, and virtue is that it
all takes a rather large amount of time for humans, but the tech world
doesn't stand still.  If you look at the lifestyle of the average
American, there are plenty of places with room for improvement.

At the same time, there are plenty of limiting behaviors and
attitudes.  Kitchen automation?  Many people agree that this is
something that would be nice to have.  However, they don't have any
clear plan for a means to this end.  One thing that we know about any
automation, in the simplest sense, is that automation works very well
when a precise and quantified list of instructions are readily
available.  So you might say, yeah, recipes are a good place to start
kitchen automation, right?  Ah, not so fast.  Conventional cooking
recipes are written for humans to follow through, inserting their
human judgment where the instructions are not precise enough.  An
automated kitchen robot will need a much more precise list of
commands, namely the units and measures of time.  But, alas, this very
simple ask is just too much for your average person to cope with.
What, I need to keep track of all timing when I work in the kitchen?!
That is an unacceptable nuisance that wastes my time and cramps my
style, I'm not going to do that!  Yet, this is partially a lie at the
same time.  It actually doesn't take too much time out of a typical
cooking ritual, it just takes a little bit of... well, attention.
Most of the time spent in the kitchen is literally on watching hand
movements and waiting.

So, it is the attention required that will quickly get upset.  But,
this goes even further.  What recipes are to be included for trying
out your kitchen automation robot?  Alas, as it turns out, the main
problem is that many people are too disorganized, they can't even find
their own recipes, how are they going to contribute in any meaningful
way to a kitchen automation project?

Here's another useful point to consider.  Why do we go to the big box
store when it is likely that your next door neighbor may already have
what you are looking for?  They are too disorganized.  Yeah, they can
scan barcodes in a grocery store, but the ability to create labels,
that is not for dummies to do.  They can only remove and destroy
labels, and once it is unlabeled, it cannot go back into the commerce
system, so it goes to the trash.  But then they needed what they just
threw out, so they have to buy it again, and that costs more money.
They've just succeeded in making themselves poorer.

But... the tech industry doesn't stand still, and it has
correspondingly a very little tolerance toward such inefficiency.
Companies that have showcased that kind of inefficiency in their
practice for years, well new companies came up that didn't have as
much of that inefficiency, and the old inefficient ones were pretty
quickly put out of business, simply because their selling prices were
considered too high in comparison to the new companies.

The leaky bucket... it is the American consumer norm.  But now, we
also have an additional problem of "perverse incentive" among some
companies: they want to make the bucket leak faster.  Humans are
creatures of habit, are messy and disorganized people, and when you
have this world view of the imperfect human, how are you going to
exploit them as much as possible for your own business's financial
gain?

Purportedly inefficiency would not be so much of a problem if one was
guided by mathematical reason... but Americans are bad at math
compared to the world standard, and they spend no shortage of time
listening to "fake news" that is absolutely king at card stacking and
presenting unquantified information, "half-truths" that tantamount to
lies because their lack of statistical and quantitative disclosure
essentially has the same effect on people as telling a lie.

But... even though humans are creatures of habit and slow to change,
they do change eventually.  It just takes the course of one or more
decades before they will change their ways.  Sometimes the problem is
that people really don't want to learn new things.  In the extreme
case of this, it takes the forgetfulness of the younger generation,
who despite their true desires, are forced to learn new things out of
necessity, and that's how people who endemically hate learning end up
learning new things.  But most of the time, 10 to 20 years with the
same person submersed in habit building and exposure to thought
leaders will do the trick.  In all honesty, the extreme case is only
slower than the average case by a factor of 4... 80 to 120 years.
