---
layout: post
title: "The story behind SourceForge, and some personal reflection"
date: 2019-10-10 19:32 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

SourceForge.net, ah, yes, a once popular open-source hosting provider,
is now, not so much any more.  Why is that?  Most are pointing to
their management blunder mistake where they started bundling adware
with project installers without permission and taking over so-called
"abandoned" projects to do so.  Yeah, there's not much news about
SourceForge on Wikipedia, but it does have a link to an interesting
article about its rise to fame around the year 2007.

20191008/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SourceForge  
20191008/https://www.datamation.com/osrc/article.php/3705731/The-SourceForge-Story.htm

Ah, yes, good times, how I remember so vividly how I discovered
SourceForge.net through osmosis... through "word of mouth"... my
brother found The Ultimate Chex Quest, which used the Doom Legacy game
engine, whose source code was hosted on SourceForge.net, and from
there is where I learned about a whole host of other useful software.

<!-- more -->

From the Doom Legacy source code itself, I learned about DJGPP, then
from DJGPP, I learned about Emacs, then from Emacs, I learned about
GNU, the Free Software Foundation, and Linux.  Then from both the Free
Software Directory and SourceForge.net, I learned about a whole host
of free, libre, open-source software, such as Inkscape, Stellarium,
and many others.  Also from a game from my brother callsed _Star Wars
Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy_, I learned about the Quake 3 game engine,
then the QuArK Quake map editor, then the GtkRadiant map editor, then
the eponymous GTK+ widget toolkit.  From Inkscape I learned about
Blender by "word of mouth" reference in their documentation: "we're
not trying to compete with Blender."

From miscellaneous math articles on Wikipedia I learned about Sage.
From Sage I learned about VMware and played around with a Ubuntu
virtual machine.  From there, everything took off to get to where I am
today.
