---
layout: post
title: "TechShop goes bankrupt, and reflections on the economics of
        research projects"
date: 2019-01-02 05:57 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi]
tags: [raspberry-pi]
---

When researching reflow soldering ovens, I happened to find this
interesting article about TechShop going bankrupt.

20190102/https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/geek-life/hands-on/techshop-goes-bankrupt

TechShop was a makerspace started by Jim Newton, "who once served as
an advisor to the TV show _Mythbusters_."  Why did it fail?
Basically, they highlighted that most makerspaces are not-for-profit
and get large grants, "often bankrolled by government or philanthropic
organizations."  For these costs, we're largely talking hardware
tools, the kind of large, specialized tools that most people would not
personally own themselves.

For my own side, I've had other discussions that made me think.  What
are the primary costs of some of the research projects I am following
progress on or doing myself?  How are these being funded?  Some of the
most interesting research projects I am following, such as the EOMA68
Earth Friendly Computing Devices project, are entirely crowd-funded.
The EOMA68 project exceeded its funding goal.  Despite delays and
slowdowns, interestingly this project seems like it is coming through.
Yes, due to the delays, there were later some shortages of money,
there were later additional donations, and there were some large
anonymous private donors who pitched in more money.

<!-- more -->

For government funded research projects, there are often times very
many projects funded that don't really pan out.  Either that, or the
customers of the product aren't really interested in what they got,
not to the extent where the development cost would be justified.
Take, for example, some kinds of medical devices for the elderly.  For
sure, there are some elderly who really want the medical devices, and
in fact they would have been determined to fund the devices on their
own, even if they didn't end up paying for them in full.  But is that
true for the vast majority of elderly people?  Is a high-tech medical
device really what they want, or are their interests elsewhere in
something else?  Do they see the medical device mainly as a short-term
gimmick where they believe not too much effort should be invested in
it?

Being that the medical industry has a lot of government and insurance
company involvement, there are quite a lot of interesting things to be
said about medical technology for all ages and all walks of life.
First of all, due to the cost equations, generally this is an area
that can be said where there are very many things going on where the
patients, the recipients of the products and care, honestly don't care
as much about the products as the providers of the products and care
do.  This is generally okay under most circumstances, but
unfortunately due to the interventions of insurance and government
funds, this can also be made the case for very expensive things too.

This also has implications for those people who are interested in
developing medical technology.  (Suffice it to say, the implications
are greater for medical technology developers than, say, those nurses
who administer medical care to patients more directly.)  A lot of
technologists are interested in working on medical technology and may
think of doing so being a "dream job."  But, you have to accept the
placement of how the technology features with customers.  In the end,
medical technology is, as it should be, a limited area of the economy,
and there is a much larger technology economy outside of medical
technology than there is inside it.  From a statistical and
probabilistic standpoint, you should correspondingly adjust your
expectations and, and even personal excitement, about the potential
job opportunities too.

Specifically, in the interest of medical research, much of it is
funded by very large grants from private individuals who have, in
effect, a lot of central power.  Either that, or by large government
grants that follow the same logic.  As it turns out, there is a dearth
of crowdfunding for medical devices.  Why is this?  This kind of goes
back to what I was saying.  There isn't intrinsically a large amount
of personal interest in these technologies.

Now, for my own research.  Some of the best research is that which is
funded by sound financial means.  Much of my research is based off of
very low-cost means.  I'm starting to get into hardware, and that
means that some of the physical costs involved may be higher.  But,
for many many tasks, I've figured out cheaper, if less conventional,
ways to do things, and most of the time, after a bit of practice and
learning, I can end up performing the non-conventional technique just
as efficiently as the hand-tooling technique with more specialized
hand tools.

My advice if you're interested in medical device technology research?
Walk the walk and talk the talk of the same path I've described for
technology research in general.  See if you can fund your own research
or get it crowdfunded.  That way, you at least know that someone on
_both_ the granter and recipient side, even if it only be yourself, is
really interested to the same extent as the funds that have been
granted.
