---
layout: post
title: Libre bridges to modern chat and messaging software
date: 2019-06-28 18:45 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

So, nowadays, advanced chat features and functions are starting to
become more widespread, mainly due to the advent of smartphones.
Sure, us tech geeks already had a way to do this long beforfe the
smartphone boom, but unfortunately, that way never became popular
among widespread society.  So now, after the fact, we are trying to
clean up and pick up the pieces.  The software that became popular
among the non-technical consumer sector is largely proprietary
software: Skype, Facebook, Google Hangouts, Whatsapp, and the like.
Unfortunately, proprietary softwre doesn't cut it for us techies, so
we have to figure out how to interoperate with the proprietary
ecosystem.

As it turns out, the proprietary software app developers did not care
to develop formal protocol standards.  Rather, they each independently
created their own proprietary and incompatible protocols.  So, after
the fact, in lack of documentation, us techies had to go back and
reverse engineer these proprietary protocols of the widespread
software.  For what we've found, we've assembled our work into some
useful software packages to "bridge" into these proprietary networks.
"Matrix" sounds like a particularly good solution to this modern
problem.  Matrix is a protocol, and Riot is the client.  One of the
older and less featureful solutions was Rocket.chat, which featured a
bridge to connect with Slack.

20190628/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slack_%28software%29  
20190628/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_%28protocol%29

In the old days, proprietary document formats were the mainstay
problem.  However, in recent years, that problem has since been toned
down and dialed back.
