---
layout: post
title: "Does sunscreen contain endocrine disruptors, and reflections
        on chemicals that are good or bad for our planet"
date: 2019-02-05 12:15 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi, mat-sci]
tags: [raspberry-pi, mat-sci]
---

Does sunscreen contain endocrine disruptors?  I do remember reading
that sunscreen is bad for the environment.  Let's take a look at the
Wikipedia article on sunscreen.  It contains a list of chemicals that
are potentially contained within sunscreen.

20190205/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunscreen

All of the chemicals have one or more 6-member carbon rings, and some
even have 5-member carbon rings.  Suffice it to say, many chemicals in
sunscreen have the ability to readily transform into an endocrine
disruptor, if they are not already an endocrine disruptor themselves.
The only chemicals in sunscreen that do not have the ability to
transform into an endocrine disruptor are titanium dioxide and zinc
oxide.  However, titanium dioxide has a tendency to accumulate in the
ground and is known to be harmful to animals in higher concentrations.
Zinc oxide is practically the only chemical in sunscreen that cannot
be readily transformed into a hazardous chemical.

Alas, I must admit.  My stated suspicion against chemicals with
6-member carbon rings or 5-member carbon rings is a really tough one.
It's only natural, due to the elemental structure of carbon, that many
organic chemicals will have 6-member or 5-member rings within them.
Surely such a recommended restriction would be enough to make any
chemical industry pundit upset.  If there is no statistical evidence
that our chemical is dangerous, why are you criticizing us for the
potential risks that might come about due to uncontrolled
transformation of our chemical?

<!-- more -->

But, at the same time, I must admit.  The bottom-line risks as I've
stated are real.  By definition, the _natural environment_ is the
environment thus uncontrolled by humans.  By the rules of nature's
game, anything can happen spontaneously.  It's just that, in our
artificial world, we have a choice of how many of what types of
artificial chemicals we pump, dump, or accidentally drop into the
natural world as our starting point.  From there, the chaos of
unchecked chemical transformation can take its force.  Under this line
of reasoning, it honestly doesn't matter if the chemical in its
pristine, artifically manufactured form is safe.  In nature, it is
_inevitable_ that it's shape _will_ get mutated, so it is, in a sense,
a red herring to assume that the unmutated chemical being safe means
that the chemical is wholistically safe.

By far and large, the most potent means of taking an otherwise
harmless chemical and turning it into a hazardous one by spontaneous,
uncontrolled means is by _breaking_ bonds.  It is less likely, though
still possible, that after bonds are broken, chemicals can recombine
into a larger molecule.

Interestingly, when I think about this carefully, I realize that none
of the chemicals I use in my film negative archival case are any of
the stated hazardous chemicals, chemicals that can form hazardous
byproducts if broken down.  My included chemicals are strictly limited
to polypropylene, polyethylene, cellulose acetate (film base), gelatin
(emulsion), silver (for black-and-white image), and organic dyes (for
color image), cellulose (for paper in labels), and other dyes/pigments
for printed/written labels.  Matter of fact, I can state this in an
interesting catch-phrase.

> If it can destroy your photographs, then it can also destroy your
> planet.

When you think about this deeper, these statements imply that one way
or another, we would have to undergo some major lifestyle shifts as a
society to eliminate the risk that uncontrolled breakdown of these
chemicals poses to the environment and our own human health.  Either
we would have to abandon the chemicals entirely, or should we continue
to use them, we would have to treat them as highly controlled
substances.  We would have to be dilligent that not a single object of
the hazardous chemicals gets lost.  Disposal would have strict
accounting, garbage trucks would be secured so that garbage cannot
accidentally blow out of the top of garbage trucks, and all final
disposal would happen in highly controlled, enclosed incinerators.
The incinerators would burn hot enough to _completely_ break down the
organic molecules, and all flue gases would be electrostatically
filtered to remove heavy metals from the gas and only pass through the
broken down simple organic molecules to the open air.

Even without uncontrolled breakdown of the chemicals, inhaling dust
from the pristine chemicals can quite often have a negative effect on
human health too.  So, at our current rates, even the highly
controlled disposal lifestyle is not enough.  Basically our long good,
long-term sustainable option is to completely switch away from
hazardous chemicals in the environments and food containers of our
everyday life.  The hazardous chemicals would only be permissible in
speciality industrial environments, where it is reasonable to assume
the custodians of such environments can ensure the controlled disposal
stated to be necessary.

Natural rubber does not contain a chemical structure that would lend
itself to being an endocrine disruptor when broken down.  The
synthetic rubber cis-polyisoprene rubber is designed to be the same
chemical structure as natural rubber.  Likewise, acrylic is a safe
chemical under break-down.

Note that although some people are allergic to natural rubber latex,
this applies primarily to the antigenic proteins in natural rubber
latex.  Hence, reduction of this from natural rubber latex or use of
pure synthetic cis-polyisoprene rubber can mitigate this problem.

20190207/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_rubber
