---
layout: post
title: Laptop mufflers
date: 2019-12-10 20:15 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Oh, the awful high frequency noise that our Intel laptop fans make.
They just got to do that, don't they?  They want a small and fast
computer at the same time, so what better way is there to do that than
to place a CPU inside that generates a lot of heat, and spin a small
fan fast to vent it out?  Alas, the obvious penalty of this is the
disposition to make high frequency noise, jarring noise as it is, but
even more so when it is caused from moving air with turbulence.

Why do we use these monsters?  Probably only because we are forced to
for work.  So, how do we comfort the ears with these?  The most
intuitive way is to simply find a way to direct the air flow away from
your ears, to place a barrier between your head and the fan vents, to
slow down the flow of air by spreading it out over a larger amount of
space, and to find ways to absorb the high frequencies.

As it turns out, a simple way to do this is to design a foam padded
cardboard structure that does just that.  Direct the air stream away
from your head by putting up barriers to point the air stream to the
proper direction.  This actually works pretty well.

For laptops, if you find your laptop is noisier in some rooms than
others, take a look at the acoustic environment.  Are there lots of
hard, flat surfaces that reflect high frequency sounds rather than
absorbing?  Try padding out any such surfaces immediately within the
vincity of your laptop.  You'll find it makes things a lot quieter.

<!-- more -->

Other interesting ideas, going above and beyond just the noise, the
waste heat itself.  In hot climates this can really make the
environment too warm, so advanced fan ducting and venting measures can
be taken to vent that hot air outside the room.

20191210/DuckDuckGo laptop muffler  
20191210/https://www.overclockers.com/building-a-pc-muffler/  
20191210/https://www.quora.com/Why-are-the-fan-vents-on-laptops-usually-located-on-the-bottom?share=1  
20191210/https://hardforum.com/threads/my-pc-hot-air-exhaust-project-vent-hot-air-outside-the-room.1642510/
