---
layout: post
title: Some interesting things I've learned from another Twitter
date: 2019-01-03 19:55 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [misc, random, random-software, twitter]
tags: [misc, random, random-software, twitter]
---

So, I decided to visit a Twitter account of another friend, and,
well... my experience was largely the same.  It would certainly be
nice if the available information was more organized, and indeed there
is useful information in there.  Alas, apparently that's what my
blogging efforts are for.

20190103/https://twitter.com/rishmishra

Also, I decided to revisit the website of this friend, and I've found
it to be retooled with WordPress, rather than using GitHub Pages
Jekyll.

20190103/https://jamesmishra.com/2018/12/17/turning-dropbox-paper-notes-into-latex/#more-10

Ah!  So you're wondering about that one `has` repository that James
Mishra made?  You can find out from Twitter, the reason why this
repository was made was so that this URL can be constructed.

20190103/https://github.com/jamesmishra/has/issues

Anyways, here are the Twitter things that I couldn't sort into any
other category, or I couldn't yet place into a candidate for a
non-random category.  I have additional blog post articles with
corresponding categories and tags when I did find a reasonable
category to sort the information into.

<!-- more -->

Very interesting.  African Americans are found in jobs that are more
vulnerable to replacement by automation than other demographic
categories.  In light of this, we need to make sure that education and
workforce retraining resources are also as well available to them as
they are to other demographics.

20190103/https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-work/automation-and-the-future-of-the-african-american-workforce

Ha!  An AI saw an Ad with a human face in it and claimed the person
depicted was jaywalking.

20190103/https://www.caixinglobal.com/2018-11-22/ai-mistakes-bus-side-ad-for-famous-ceo-charges-her-with-jaywalkingdo-101350772.html

Job prospects about working for Facebook?  Well, that's not a company
people really want to be working for anymore.  Also, more and more
prospective hires are asking about the ethics of their job positions,
in light of many past activities performed by such companies.

20190103/https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/15/technology/jobs-facebook-computer-science-students.html

Wow, this is shocking.  Gender bias in cardiology?  In 2017,
prospective women candidates are still being asked about their intent
to have children, as was the case in 1995.  There's also some other
general discussion about ways to reduce gender bias.  Being
"good-ish," trying to be good but admitting you may be unconscious
about your flaws, is better than being "good."

20190103/https://www.cardiovascularbusiness.com/topics/practice-management/taking-small-steps-address-gender-bias-cardiology

Interesting.  This man had a tweet storm about a stolen van and not
liking the San Francisco law's about stolen rental vehicles imposing
such large delays until action can be taken.  After that, some of the
laws did get changed for the better.

20190103/https://www.sfchronicle.com/politics/article/SF-man-s-tweetstorm-over-stolen-van-leads-to-13222061.php?utm_campaign=twitter-premium&utm_source=CMS%20Sharing%20Button&utm_medium=social

Wow, now this is really interesting.  Endocrine disruptors from
chemicals found in modern materials like plastics have been causing a
multi-generational decline in sperm count.  Industrialization
purportedly is the overarching environmental variable that is not
disputed here.  Eventually, if this keeps going at at the current
rate, it will lead to the extinction of the human species, due to
being unable to reproduce.

20190103/https://www.gq.com/story/sperm-count-zero

This is interesting.  A surprising way to close the gap in college
admissions is to make sure that people of minorities are informed that
retaking the ACT or SAT test is an option.  Many minorities do not
consider retaking the test, but those of non-minority background
typically retake the test one or more times.

20190103/https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/27/upshot/a-surprisingly-simple-way-to-help-level-the-playing-field-of-college-admissions.html

Interesting article about why you should interview engineers.  When
you as the interviewer participate, you are also helping improve your
own related conversational skills.

20190103/https://blog.usejournal.com/5-reasons-why-you-should-start-interviewing-other-engineers-c43fe6a6406e

Not particularly informative.  A short article touting that trust in
people is the new economy that drives startups like Uber and
Instacart.

20190103/https://coinlabs.co/trust-in-people-is-the-new-tech-currency-960190032aa6

----------

Now we cover lots of subjects about Uber.

Uber engineering: don't just measure differences in the mean or
median, look at the entire distribution if you want to understand if a
change is really an improvement across user groups.

20190103/https://eng.uber.com/analyzing-experiment-outcomes/

Mapbox visualization being used in Uber?  I've got to look into what
that entails.  Well, unfortunately it appears Mapbox is proprietary,
so it may be of limited use to me.

20190103/https://eng.uber.com/uber-visualization-mapbox/  
20190103/https://www.mapbox.com

Uber Eats, Uber food delivery is purportedly a fast growing business.
And here, with Uber Eats, their prioritizing the food delivered more
so than the restaurant.  Even more interesting is that they are
building up special "Uber Eats exclusive" food venues in locations
where their data points to high demand but a scarcity in local supply.

20190103/https://venturebeat.com/2018/10/02/uber-eats-and-the-6b-bookings-run-rate-the-ai-success-story-no-one-is-talking-about/  
20190103/

Uber studies on improving curbsides and congestion pricing to solve
the urban traffic congestion problem.

20190103/https://www.uber.com/newsroom/campaign-sustainable-mobility/  
20190103/https://medium.com/uber-under-the-hood/road-pricing-a-solution-to-gridlock-b093b3f364f2

Very interesting account here from an Uber engineer that moved his
career from financial analyst to software engineer.  I'll summarize
some of the things that I like most about this article.

* When starting out, you don't need to worry about being at a
  disadvantage compared to othe entry-level engineers that may come
  from purportedly more experienced backgrounds.  Everyone will find
  their own new niche in the new environment where they will become
  experienced in and the go-to person for.

* "Engineering is more tedious than difficult."  Modern engineering is
  more about "impedance-matching" software interfaces.  A good analogy
  is finding the right electrical adapters to get optimum electrical
  power for modern electronic gadgets.

* The rapid depreciation is "awesome."  What makes the rapid
  depreciation "awesome"?  Mainly, it's the consequence that because
  of this, it's pretty easy to reach an advanced career position
  pretty quickly in software engineering, whereas it may take 30 years
  in other slower-moving professions with more legacy to them.

* Being able to quickly search for syntax of an unfamiliar programming
  language is expected of experienced programmers.  You don't need to
  worry too much about mastering a programming language.

20190103/https://eng.uber.com/joe-zhou-career-move/

Uber has this whole web page and site about their rebranding and
designer activity.

20190103/https://www.uber.design/case-studies/rebrand-2018

Uber's troubles with getting electric Scooters for ride-sharing into
cities.  Many places had regulations that made them unable to get
successful deployments out.

20190103/https://slate.com/business/2018/09/after-losing-to-uber-cities-are-squeezing-scooters-and-bike-shares.html

Taxi medallions?  Wow, this is interesting, a legislative construction
that is highly lucrative for the investors but is a great detriment
for the drivers and riders.  This is one of the reasons why Uber was
so competitive against traditional taxi services -- and so
controversial.

20190103/https://slate.com/business/2012/06/taxi-medallions-how-new-yorks-terrible-taxi-system-makes-fares-higher-and-drivers-poorer.html

Greyball.  Now, this is quite a shocking clandestine operation Uber
has been running.  Originally, Uber created the app Greyball as a
means of defence against bad riders.  Violation of Terms of Service
(VTOS) was its catchphrase for its purpose.  But later on, this app
was repurposed as a means to evade government authorities that are
trying to oppose Uber's rollout into a new city.

20190103/https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/03/technology/uber-greyball-program-evade-authorities.html

What happened to Uber disrupting car ownership?  Although that was
some of the goals of Uber employees, to reduce private car ownership
and reduce total vehicle miles traveled, that has not really panned
out.  At the current levels, private car ownership and driving remains
largely the same, and due to the specifics of low Uber vehicle
service, some time spent driving between ride requests slightly adds
to the total vehicle miles traveled.  There are a few reasons for this
that could be effectively looked at as "bugs" in the application, such
as requiring an on-demand model of transport that reduces the ability
to combine rides.

20190103/https://medium.com/@jmnickels/what-happened-to-uber-disrupting-car-ownership-9d7a44b20427

Interesting story of a failed startup that had a goal similar to the
Uber model.  This one wanted to monetize neighbor's home catering.
Alas, the laws around California were non-permissive.  So, the startup
had two options.  One would be to just go ahead and keep moving with
its business ideal, hoping authorities would change their mind once
things got going.  The other way would be to "play nice" and try to
work with the authorities to get the laws changed.  Unfortunately, the
second option was the option they chose, this does not work well with
the venture capital startup company model, they got in trouble with
the authorities investigating them when they were trying to work
through changes in the laws, and ultimately they ran out of time and
money before could go anywhere.

So, here's the point.  For a venture-capital startup, if they want to
run in a business that is legally questionable, they should just jump
in and keep going until they are doing well from a venture capital
standpoint.  But, if they want to work things out legally and they are
starting small, before company operations in advance, they should do
that exclusively, ideally as a non-profit.

20190103/https://qz.com/work/1379900/a-california-food-sharing-bill-came-too-late-for-a-startup-that-championed-it/
