---
layout: post
title: WeWork, rental office space company
date: 2019-02-06 12:48 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [twitter, random-software]
tags: [twitter, random-software]
---

So, I heard of WeWork from someone on Twitter, and it sounded
interesting, so I decided to investigate.  And indeed it is
interesting!  Basically, they are an office rental space company that
wants to be more than the mundane title would suggest, and they are in
fact much more!  For example, they use 3D scanning for all of their
office spaces they move into and setup.

20190206/https://www.wework.com  
20190206/https://www.wework.com/mission  
20190206/https://www.wework.com/blog  
20190206/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/using-lasers-to-capture-the-tiniest-details-of-a-workspace  
20190206/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/wecompany  
20190206/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/how-someone-really-bad-at-drawing-creates-stunning-art

Wow, interesting!  WeWork and Rent the Runway are partnering.  I guess
Rent the Runway is also something to watch for the future too.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/entrepreneurs-say-the-right-clothes-help-them-demand-respect

Alas, now I keep reading further for more of their blog articles.

Researching the impact of stairs on a community, these are best when
they are visible from the elevators and near go-to community locations
such as kitchens.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/to-create-a-community-start-with-stairs

<!-- more -->

AI to layout desks in an office, more accurate than humans.  Without
this, laying out desks in an office is a very long and mundane design
chore.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/this-algorithm-might-design-your-next-office

WeWork office artistic, creative design exceeds typical school design,
a boon to kids visiting the office.  So hence came the idea to setup a
school inside WeWork office spaces with a more creative agenda, and
also encouraging WeWork entrepreneurial adult members to learn from
their creative kids.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/learning-from-kids-when-we-take-them-to-work

WeWork on ways to attract more women to tech jobs, and their own
success stories with increasing the number of women in their Flatiron
tech school.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/3-ways-to-attract-more-women-to-tech-jobs

Very interesting story about how WeWork handled a cleaning complaint
problem in one of their Brazil facilities.  They setup a safe space
with custodial staff in question, and upon learning that nearly half
of them could not read, they decided to have a kindergarten teacher
with early reading experience teach them.  The alternative not taken
would be to fire the illiterate.  Pretty soon, there were virtually no
more cleanliness complaints in the facility, and the custodial staff
who recently learned to read was confident in their interactions with
the members.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/wework's-nataly-bonato-turns-an-issue-into-a-teaching-moment

Find out how many conference rooms an office needs with machine
learning.  There are some interesting subtle facts like smaller
companies needing more meeting rooms per person than larger companies.

https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/designing-with-machine-learning

This blog article really goes into detail about how WeWork wants to
make building ownership more quantitative and data-driven.  They are
already doing a lot of things that I have been dreaming of, but
couldn't really do due to... well, lack of interest.  Some of the
people around me want to keep doing some things the old way, so my
systems cannot scale as quickly as a purpose-built system for people
interested in more modern ways of living.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/product-research-at-wework

This is WeWork's first blog post on the subject of 3D scanning and 360
degree photography in what they call "Reality Capture."

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/why-reality-capture-matters-at-wework

WeWork open sources some of their building management software.  Alas,
it is written as Autodesk extensions, so it's hard to see how that
could be more mainstream.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/wework-open-sources-case-apps

WeWork predicts that indoor beacons will become more relevant... well,
after a crash where they were being predominantly used for marketing
purposes.  But maybe, sometime soon in the future, indoor beacons will
serve a purpose similar to the application use of GPS outdoors.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/how-beacons-will-change-architecture

A UX designer who joined WeWork and told no one, because thay wanted
to secretly explore before joining.

20190207/https://www.wework.com/blog/posts/i-joined-wework

WeWork only has blog articles back to the beginning of the year 2015.
Indeed they are a young company.
