---
layout: post
title: "Random notes on human health and reflection on \"warranty
        coverage\" of the human body"
date: 2019-10-29 02:52 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [random]
tags: [random]
---

When searching for another subject "when news becomes old," I had some
interesting search engine suggestions, so I decided to pursue it.
This is what I've found.

Signs that your body is too acidic.  Salts come into your body that
make it acidic from the food that you eat.  Fruits and vegetables tend
to be alkaline.  Meat, dairy, grains (especially white), and sugar
tend to result in an acidic pH.  Sweating, i.e. from physical
exercise, reduces acidity.  But not too much sweating, because then
you could get a salt imbalance, and hence you'll need saltier foods.
Grains are great for this, chances are you'll need more energy at the
same time you need more salt due to doing intensive physical labor.
Drinking more water, of course, also neutralizes pH.

Normally this is a good thing, if you do intensive physical labor,
you're going to be sweating them out and will need salts replenished.
But the problem is that our modern lifestyles have changed but our
diets have not.  So Americans tend to be acidic.

What are the negative effects of an acidic body?  Your body will
reduce bone mineralization to neutralize the acid and pull away
minerals from your muscles, making you weaker.  Also, your brain will
not function as efficiently... of course we know the extreme cases of
drinking salt water can result in hallucinations.

20191029/DuckDuckGo when news becomes on your body  
20191029/https://www.thealternativedaily.com/signs-your-body-is-too-acidic/

<!-- more -->

Who owns your body?  You don't own your body, God does.

20191029/https://world.wng.org/2019/05/who_owns_your_body

Programmed cell death?

20191029/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programmed_cell_death  
20191029/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phenoptosis

Women are _not_ susceptible to pH changes than men or have a generally
more acidic.  Nope, it's supposed to be the same between men and
women.  The main difference is the severity of the changes and
tolerance for non-ideal pH.  Osteoporosis is a worse problem for women
than for men, for example.

20191029/DuckDuckGo women versus men ph  
20191029/https://www.livestrong.com/article/334574-foods-that-make-a-womans-body-more-acidic/

----------

Design subtext of the human body: WARRANTY VOID IF COVER REMOVED.  NO
USER SERVICEABLE PARTS INSIDE.

If there's any starker comparison, it's the design of the human eye
versus (D)SLR cameras.  In technical terms of regular operation, both
have strong similarities.  The primary difference is not so much the
bulding materials, but the long term maintenance and lifetime
equation.  Due to the modular engineering of (D)SLR cameras, it is
tremendously easy to service them and keep them operational long-term.
In fact, 100 year old camera lenses still work pretty good by the
terms of their original design and engineering.  But human eyes, they
are nigh unserviceable.

Got a lens aberration?  On an SLR camera lens, you'd open up the lens
and turn the convenient calibration screws.  The human eye, it has no
such modular compensations, nor means of clean open and close.  If
anything, an eye surgeon would end up cutting through the exterior of
the human eye for servicing.

Got dust inside on your DSLR sensor?  It always happens due to age,
but no problem with an DSLR camera, it is designed with a special
sensor cleaning mode for you to remove the dust.  As it turns out,
despite the sealing of the human eye, dust still gets on the retina,
but once it's in there, it's stuck, without really much remedy for
cleaning.

Now, you ask the question, what exactly does it mean to void the
warranty on the human body?  Well, first of all, you have to know who
the manufacturer is.  By the logic mentioned in one of the previous
articles, it is God.  So, when the warranty is void, that means that
any servicing that the manufacturer would otherwise provide will not
be provided any longer, or at least not without a fee.  What servicing
does God provide to the human body?  Well, by the Catholic
understanding, God really doesn't provide much servicing to the human
body during its Earthly life.  Pretty much the main servicing that
happens is after the end of a person's Earthly life: the resurrection
of the body for life everlasting.

We know from our modern science that the human body as-is cannot last
forever.  Fundamentally, at the cellular level, cell division in most
regular cells of the body is imperfect: there are telomeres that
shorten with each cell divide.  Eventually, once the telomeres get too
short, the cells can no longer divide and result in useful cells.
This essentially marks the hard-stop end of human life, if everything
else about human health has been optimized to the maximum.

So, the primary manufacturer servicing that requires "warranty
coverage" is a "conversion package" to upgrade the human body from
finite life to eternal life.  If alterations have been made that will
void the warranty, God may not provide this service, or at least
threaten not to without a suitable "payment."  This would be, by
analogy, time spent in purgatory, labor spent to work for a penance
that could pay the requisite fee for non-warranty-covered servicing.

Why is the Catholic Christian understanding required in particular,
rather than the more abstract Christian understanding?  As you can
see, there are some requisite technicalities that can't really be
fully explained when the disagreements between the various Christian
beliefs are left in place.  In particular, the resurrection of the
body and purgatory.  "Glorified bodies" is the key word, implying that
some change had to take place to the human body for it to be able to
take on the forms and features observed in resurrected bodies capable
of eternal life.

20191102/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resurrection_of_the_dead  
20191102/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resurrection_of_the_dead#Modern_Era  
20191102/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resurrection_of_the_dead#Denominational_views  
20191102/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purgatory

An important question that still needs to be answered.  What
modifications to the human body do not "void the warranty?"  "Nothing
that enters one from outside can defile that person; but the things
that come out from within are what defile." (Mark 7:15) But this
doesn't really answer the question of the _body_, though the
statements definitely pertain to the soul.  The general belief appears
to be that there are a large range of "retrofit" modifications made
for the medical purpose of restoring bodily function and extending
life on Earth that are permitted, with only a few that are forbidden.
In particular, the use of embryonic stem cells for replacement organs,
though the use of non-embryonic stem cells for replacement organs is
permitted.
