---
layout: post
title: "Searching for the Internet Archive community, a disappointment"
date: 2020-07-04 16:28 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [vintage-computing, inven-sys]
tags: [vintage-computing, inven-sys]
---

So, after really getting into the lowdown of archiving, I'm thinking.
I need to find a really good community that is focused on that more
general subject, archiving.  68kMLA, they're a pretty good community
but they're focused on Macintoshes in general, and the historic world
is bigger than just the Macintosh, we know.  So, I've felt that the
Internet Archive got pretty good momentum behind it in building such
an digital archival community of the future that I've been looking
for, and they have some sort of connection with the broader community
when it comes to the process for uploading digitized books.  So,
surely, they have a plenty good forum around there for me to go
looking.

Okay, so I've found something.  Alas, my feeling, upon entering...
this is a forum inundated by "noobs"!  This is all about basic
customer support questions, I can't get this book to work, why do I
see this issue when visiting this URL, there's a bug here and there.
Yeah, sure, we absolutely need a good discussion place for that kind
of interaction.  But, again, this goes back to teamwork versus
group-work, this is clearly an area that hyper-manifests the
individualized mode of working together, ultimately the primary reason
why most people come is to solve some kind of personal problem.

20200704/DuckDuckGo internet archive community forum  
20200704/https://archive.org/iathreads/forums.php  
20200704/https://archive.org/post/1108514/welcome-to-us-petabox  
20200704/https://web.archive.org/web/20130813145128/http://searchfun.in/

<!-- more -->

What I'm looking for is something where the community is trying to
achieve something bigger, like build a globe-spanning shared base of
technologies.

Nevertheless, on some areas of the forum, you see pockets of really
helpful and valuate individuals, like here the example.

20200704/https://archive.org/post/428113/found-on-community

But, along the way, I did find this interesting information about how
the Internet Archive Wayback Machine costs to run, purportedly about a
million dollars a month.

20200704/https://archive.org/post/1084803/how-much-archiveorg-monthly-operating-cost  
20200704/https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/organizations/943242767

Okay, looking a little deeper on their website, maybe forum isn't the
place to look, how about volunteering?  Okay, now we're making
progress.  Here they have a GitHub repository for their online digital
library, Open Library, yeah that's better, but looking around first
thing, I see the development experience is troubled.  You have to
access a centralized dev-uat server for testing that has quirks?  Oh,
come on, can they somehow make it like a Docker container of a sort,
in any way?

20200704/https://archive.org/about/volunteerpositions.php  
20200704/https://github.com/internetarchive/openlibrary/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md

The Internet Archive Emergency Lending Library?  That was taken down
after big publishers banded together and filed a class action lawsuit.
The problem was the switch-over compared to their original
configuration, to open it up to the whole public, rather than
invite-only registered members, and allow downloads to an unlimited
number of devices, rather than to a limited number of devices.

20200704/https://www.futuretimeline.net/forum/topic/22753-activists-rally-to-save-internet-archive-as-lawsuit-threatens-site/  
20200704/https://onehack.us/t/internet-archive-kills-its-free-digital-library-over-copyright-concerns/91667

Yeah, there's also a flip-side to the community uploads feature of the
Internet Archive.  Here, the problem is that there are a few bad
actors here and there that are uploading illegal copies of modern
copyrighted works disguised as music that ceded into the public
domain.  Be careful.

20200704/https://www.gog.com/forum/general_archive/internet_archive_downloads_legal
