---
layout: post
title: "Raspberry Pi 3A+ is a thing, clock stretching on I2C, and
        ViewTouch"
date: 2020-07-14 15:45 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi]
tags: [raspberry-pi]
---

Raspberry Pi 3A+?  Wow, that became a thing?  I thought that was a
product line that Raspberry Pi Foundation would not continue due to
lack of popularity... but now it's back!  This time, though, the board
did not sacrifice computer network-grade communications
capabilities...

KEY POINTS:

* RPi 3A+ does not have Ethernet, but it does have onboard Wi-Fi and
  Bluetooth.

* The Raspberry Pi Model A form factor has been one of the most
  requested "missing" features of the newer versions of Raspberry Pi 2
  and 3.  Thus, Raspberry Pi 3A+ has been created to fill that gap.,
  also this is somewhat of a "capstone" for the Raspberry Pi
  Foundation since their next board will be radically different from
  the classic architecture.

* The promo video is in "Far East" electronics industry style.

* Purportedly RPi 3A+ was going to be USB 3, but they blew the design
  budget on the flashy promo video.  "Guilty" replied one of the RPi
  Foundation members.

<!-- more -->

* You **can** do USB OTG with Raspberry Pi A+, but because you only
  have a 4-pin connector at full size rather than the 5-pin micro
  connector, you can only do one of either master or slave and stick
  to that, you cannot switch back and forth dynamically.

* Raspberry Pi **does not** properly implement I2C clock stretching.
  That is, when an I2C slave needs more time and signals that on the
  bus, the idea being that the master should halt the clock until the
  slave signals that it's ready.

20200714/DuckDuckGo raspberry pi 3a  
20200714/https://www.raspberrypi.org/blog/new-product-raspberry-pi-3-model-a/  
20200714/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspberry_Pi  
20200714/DuckDuckGo raspberry pi i2c clock stretching  
20200714/https://www.raspberrypi.org/forums/viewtopic.php?p=146272

Raspberry Pi point-of-sale terminals?  Go look at ViewTouch, this is
developed entirely around Raspberry Pi and free, libre, open-source
software.  Developed by who?  Not a corporate conglomerate with a big
marketing budget but not very good technical skills, but by a small
independent software developer who has been developing their own
point-of-sale terminal software since the 1980s, starting with an
Apple II computer.  So, yes... you can understand why this software
has not made inroads into most restaurants, despite being capable.

20200714/DuckDuckGo ViewTouch  
20200714/http://viewtouch.com/
