---
layout: post
title: More articles about the Coronavirus
date: 2020-03-17 12:02 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [covid19]
tags: [covid19]
---

I've found this interesting article about the person who predicted the
Coronavirus.  What is the key predictor of zoonotic viruses
transferring to humans?  Humans encroaching on the existing natural
ecosystem.  When our population grows, and when we grow our livestock
production from growth in purchasing power in the average household,
we entrench deeper onto land that we've never been regularly
frequenting before as humans.  And when that happens, viruses that
have been circulating throughout the natural environment long in
advance have the opportunity to jump to our population and circulate
within us.  To say that this is predictable is like saying that it is
predictable that without rules of the road, pedestrians would keep
getting run over and killed by motor vehicles.

Right now, from a global standpoint, we don't really have "rules of
the road" laws and regulations across all governments how are land use
is changing.  Yes, there are some governments in first-world democracy
countries that really do try to regulate what we do when we plan to
change our land use, but there are still many dictatorship governments
elesewhere in the world that wouldn't care one bit about those who
voice these concerns.  And, of course, China is one of those
countries.

20200317/http://nautil.us/issue/83/intelligence/the-man-who-saw-the-pandemic-coming?utm_source=pocket-newtab

<!-- more -->

But this goes further than that.  It also means that when you buy more
goods and services that are made in China, you are fueling that system
of government to go faster and increase the likelihood of these
incidents occurring.  It's a tough reality to face as many American
companies outsourced their manufacturing operations to China, but
that's what it is.

Here's another interesting article about cultural viewpoints on mask
wearing in public.  In Asia, it is seen as an acceptable norm, but in
the West, it is shunned heavily.  We are not yet sure how this is
going to turn out when it comes to how much different cultures put
themselves at risk to this challenge, only time will tell whether or
not the mask wearing really does stem the tide on the Coronavirus
spreading.

20200317/https://time.com/5799964/coronavirus-face-mask-asia-us/?utm_source=pocket-newtab
