---
layout: post
title: All the Music, public domain melodies
date: 2020-02-17 17:10 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [legal, license]
tags: [legal, license]
---

I've suspected this all along, and although I've written about it
before and advocated for this viewpoint, my message didn't seem to
travel far.  Until now.

Now, there is a TED talk precisely about it.  Automatically generating
and fixing all melodies in a tangible medium, thereby providing proof
of copyright.  For many decades, copyright lawsuits over melody
identity or similarity has been a serious problem in the music
industry.  The idea that you are taking a blank slate and putting
something onto it from nothing?  No, that's not the way it works with
melodies.  With melodies, there are so few choices to choose from at
the base level, a choice of one of 8 piano keys up to a maximum
sequence of 12 notes, that melodies on their own can hardly be
considered copyrightable.  Rather, it is like we are picking from the
finite set of melodies that have existed for all of time.  If we're
lucky, we pick one that hasn't been picked by anyone else before.  If
we're unlucky, we pick one that has been already used, and then we get
sued.

But, this project, All the Music, levels the playing field because it
has picked **all** the melodies, fixed tehm in a tangible medium, and
declared them to be released into public domain, thereby eliminating
the risk of copyright infringement on any future melody composed.
Matter of fact, it means no future melody can be claimed copyright
protection.

<!-- more -->

20200217/https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1&v=sJtm0MoOgiU&feature=emb_logo  
20200217/http://allthemusic.info/  
20200217/https://github.com/allthemusicllc/  
20200217/https://github.com/allthemusicllc/atm-cli  
20200217/https://archive.org/download/allthemusicllc-datasets

What about chords?  These have purportedly already been exhausted by a
project of peter burke in 2017, and you can find it on GitHub.

Now, despite the fact that the authors behind this project had
knowledge in the intersection of law, software development, and music,
I still wonder if this effort is going to be seriously considered in
future court cases.  I mean, some judge could rule that All the Music
is still legally untested ground and need not be considered in the
judgement of a current court case, in which the evidence is dismissed
completely and the old skool infringement questions are traveled down
just like nothing changed in the world.  The question, as it comes
down to in the YouTube video comments, really comes down to making
this not just a theoretical reality, but common knowledge in the legal
profession.  When every lawyer is aware of the argument as to why a
melody on its own should not be eligible for copyright protection or
worth anything in copyright infringement lawsuit cases, then the
project will be a success.  Alas, that could take up to 10 years from
the genesis day of 2019, so maybe not until the year 2030 will the
idea that melodies can't be copyright protected be a reality.
