---
layout: post
title: "More information on solder flux"
date: 2020-07-30 02:21 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [raspberry-pi]
tags: [raspberry-pi]
---

Drag soldering, liquid flux is a must-have.  Sure it is, but what
kind?  Well, that was a tough question to answer from the looks at
fist, but now, the answer is clear.  If you want to solder small,
miniaturized, high-density electronics, then no-clean flux is your
go-to kind of flux, especially if you are doing new board work rather
than repair on old boards.  Okay, that makes the decision really easy
for the sake of my own projects.

20200728/DuckDuckGo what kind of flux works best for drag soldering

This website also has a lot of other great information on your choice
of solder flux.  In particular, when working on old boards, you should
use Rosin Activated (RA) flux because the stronger flux will more
quickly clean away oxides that have built up on the board.

20200728/https://www.pcbtoolexpert.com/the-top-5-best-flux-pens/

Wait, what?  I heard mention of making your own solder flux?  Okay,
okay, let's see how that works.

<!-- more -->

This first YouTube video, it doesn't really go about making your own
flux, but rather it demonstrates how you can make a liquid flux from a
tacky flux.  Mix the tacky flux with isopropyl alcohol, then let sit
overnight, the tacky material will be dissolved and you'll have your
own liquid flux.  What?  Are you kidding me?  That stuff is flammable.
Okay, okay, but as I discuss later, this is actually rather
temperature-resistant.  Also, as the author states in the video, he
likes his liquid flux made with isopropyl alcohol because it is more
resistant to evaporation under high temperatures than conventional
liquid flux.

The YouTube video also showed a good example of how to use flux to
help you with desoldering.  First you get flux around the chip to
desolder, then you use a narrow-tipped heat gun on the chip, and then
after a while, you should be able to pull the chip off the board with
a pair of tweezers.  Wow, this trick was even demonstrated on BGA
packages, very impressive.

20200728/DuckDuckGo make your own soldering flux  
20200728/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9xk76e7nzcw

Okay, here we go.  How to make your own flux.  Here, they just find
some pine cones, cut off the "leaves," then use ethyl alcohol to
absorb the sap.  This is then distilled through some coffee filters.
Okay, okay, but you're still creating flux out of flammable chemicals
here.

20200728/https://www.instructables.com/id/Make-your-own-Eco-friendly-soldering-flux/

Don't worry too much about isopropyl alcohol, though.  The
autoignition point is 399 degrees Celsius, so long as you keep all
your equipment below that temperature, you should be fine.  And what
about ethyl alcohol?  That autoignites at 363 degrees Celsius.  So,
ethyl alcohol is not as safe to use as isopropyl alcohol.

20200728/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isopropyl_alcohol  
20200728/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethanol  
20200728/DuckDuckGo ethyl alcohol autoignition  
20200728/https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/fuels-ignition-temperatures-d_171.html

----------

So, what resulted in my soldering iron tip getting?  I'm pretty sure
it was the fault of solder flux.  Namely, the flux coating on my
solder wick.  That seemed to be where the most aggressive treatment
was coming from... the solder wick is so effective at sponging up
solder that it will always sponge away the solder right off of my
tinned tip, then I have to go about retinning it, always.  Not to
mention that the solder that flowed into the solder wick makes that
part of the solder wick no longer usable for wicking up more solder.

To add insult to injury, because the solder wick is also flux coated,
the de-tinned soldering iron gets exposed to flux, too, decreasing
longevity at the soldering iron's tip due to the deliberate mildly
corrosive properties of solder flux.
