---
layout: post
title: "Understanding human recreation and need to sleep, financial
        calculations"
date: 2020-01-20 21:00 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [personal-finance]
tags: [personal-finance]
---

As part of wrestling out the cost of hobby software projects, I'm
trying to figure this out.  How does resting and human recreation
factor in as an economic value?  The whole idea with hobby projects is
that you might subtract from recreation, or maybe even sleep, to add
to the value of a hobby project.  But if you can't know the value of
those, how do you determine the value of a hobby project?

Okay, here is the way to properly understand this.  Humans _need_ to
sleep.  As if it couldn't be said more bluntly.  The trick is to
define it as a basic human need, like the need to eat.  Therefore, if
it is compromised and under-nourished, it will have a calculable
negative impact on the economic value of anything else that is more
directly produced as a function of labor over working hours of time
directly on a project.  Likewise, you can argue the same for
recreation: Personal recreation is required for human health.  But,
here's the key.  The need has to be understood on an individual basis,
there is no one-size-fits-all for the need for sleep and recreation.

<!-- more -->

The trick here is to properly understand those as prime variables to
satsify for optimum human health, and therefore working performance,
of an individual person.  The trouble, at first sight, is that these
are very expensive activities to fulfill in terms of time consumption,
and ultimately, they cost food energy.  But, once those are satisfied,
the time that remains for working is available at 100%.  And, what is
the definition of that 100%?  At the outset, without respect to
time... it is the smartest worker you can get for an undefined amount
of time.

So... now I'm really getting detailed.  What if you don't need 100% of
the worker's available intelligence?  Purportedly, you could therefore
make compromises on their available recreation and sleep time and they
would still do just as well on the labor activities.  With that
assumption in place, it simply means that mundane labor can be worked
more cheaply by a smarter worker who has had their recreation and
sleep "stolen away" from them, because... that means that their food
energy cost, in terms of that required to maintain their basal
metabolic rate, is reduced per unit of labor time.

But, circling back to the first question.  What is the economic value
of sleep and recreation?  Well, now we have a precise measurement
stick to grade against.  It is the difference between the economic
value of a large quantity of mundane labor versus a small quantity of
highly intellectual labor.  Ultimately, in this case, I still have a
productivity scalar factor that is specific to each individual worker.
And, given the rigid definition that I had provided, you also have to
account that the base living expenses for different people differ, for
example, fundamentally because bigger people have a higher basal
metabolic rate, and therefore cost more energy for any job.  Unless,
of course, their larger body size has a specific advantage to a job,
for example in the case of distinctively physical labor.

Humans are, in all senses, quite different from server computer
hardware.  Server computers run 24x7, working tirelessly to serve.
Alas, they are utterly dependent on humans to keep paying to keep
their necessary operating expense resources of energy and network
connectivity coming.  We must not forget about the machines among us
that work tirelessly to serve, lest we stop paying to support them.
