---
layout: post
title: "My definition of fair market rates in software, a summary of
        important sectors of the general business world, and
        constraints to software employment by a big business"
date: 2020-08-09 23:21 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [personal-finance]
tags: [personal-finance]
---

So, I'm getting more into games of modeling the financials of various
different companies, and one thing that has occurred to me was that I
haven't ever really thought very much about the financials of
_running_ a software company.  I've thought far more about the
financials of a back-end customer buying software or software services
from a company.  And, here's the point.  Both sides are valid and
important to consider.

The primary reason why it's so easy to understand and model the
financials of non-tech companies is because, well, they are, by
definition, much slower moving disciplines than the tech profession.
The rules of those games don't change very quickly, so it is very easy
for a hobbyist (more specifically, someone who only has third hand
experience of those industries but a lot of it from their past life
experience) to be able to model the financials of these companies with
a lot of accuracy.  But the tech sector?  That's a moving target.

One of the big things to realize, and that we all agree on, in the
tech sector is that prices are constantly going down.  This provides
an obvious benefit for the customer: in the future, the customer will
be able to buy more technology capability for less money.  And by
being able to do so, a greater number of people in the world will be
better empowered by advanced technologies as time goes on.

<!-- more -->

The problem with this is that it makes it very difficult for
businesses to get into selling technology or technology services.
Especially, in the case, with software.  Why is hardware an easier
sell?  Because it involves the movement of tangible, physical goods.
For a number of sound reasons, it's going to be a very long time
before shipping of tangible, physical goods can happen absolutely for
zero-cost.  Because there is a baseline cost of shipping, all material
goods therefore have a baseline cost by virtue of the need to ship
materials after they are produced.  And, therefore, because there is
such a baseline cost involved, it is easy to tack on a little bit of
money for revenue to run your business.

Today, software, on the other hand, has no such fixed cost.  Nowadays,
software is exclusively distributed by the Internet, and Internet
service providers charge by a fixed monthly subscription fee or the
like.  Therefore, there is no provision of "per-item" charges, and the
total charge is never billed by the business.  So that means it
totally does not make sense to charge a little bit of extra money per
the nominal cost of an item because there is no such nominal cost.
The primary problem with Internet commerce is that if you want to
charge per item, you've got to make your customer pay in two places
rather than simply just one.

So... that's a long-winded way of saying something that is often times
stated more simply by most folks.  With hardware, with tangible
physical goods, the cost to manufacture and distribute is substantial.
However, with software, the cost to duplicate and distribute is
negligibly tiny.  If you charged your profit as a percent on copies of
software the same way you charged it on hardware, you'd never have
enough money to run any reasonable business.  Not unless you sold a
trillion copies, that is.

But the fact is, don't forget this, we still have to stay focused on
the customer.  The bottom line to the customer is that today,
customers expect technology to deliver more to them with less cost,
and software is no exception to this general rule.  The big
peculiarity with software is that it is perhaps the most hyperactive
example of how costs went dramatically down with newer technology.  If
you charge more money that would make it easier to run your business,
the customer will feel like they're being ripped off because you're
charging way too much money, and they will not buy at all.

So, how do you run a business selling software or software services?
And, how do you do so while still being fair to the customers current
fair market expectations?  Slight of hand.  Really?  Yes, really.

Remember how software development is defined exactly.  Yes, it is
exactly that: the design and development phase of a product.  Pure
software, on its own, is to the exclusion of the manufacturing phase
because it is so cheap it really doesn't matter.  In the grand scheme
of things, software development is a research and development
functional area within a business.  Normally, a business cannot
survive on research and development alone unless that is the primary
product that you sell to your customers.

So, that's just the point.  You want to sell software as a primary
business in the modern era?  Your best bet is to sell software
research and development services to those customers who are willing
to pay directly for this.  These customers are almost exclusively
businesses and government institutions.  The rare exception to this
rule was the recent cropping up of the "industry" of crowdfunding.
Most generally stated, the way this works is that communities of
tech-savvy folks, especially those who are involved in tech hobbies,
get together online with a shared interest and desire for a common
research and development goal.  However, despite their hobby working
capabilities, they realize they can't simply team themselves into a
large crowd of part-time hobbyist tech volunteers because of the
limits of the human mind's ability to command high-level thought over
the summation of a large number of very short periods of time, and
especially when there are a large number of distinct human brains
involve.

It's when they realize, they need quality, not quantity, that they
assemble the crowdfunding campaign.  So, instead of assembling a
massive number of small bits of spare time, they instead assemble a
massive number of small bits of spare money.  And together, they can
pool in enough money to hire out full-time research and development
staffing to carry out the project to completion.

So, you must understand my primary point here.  In today's world, if
you want to sell software services as a business, you must have a very
wise customer on the other end, whether it be a business or a large
community of very smart and diligent hobbyists.  In today's world, you
cannot make money selling software services to a fool, period.

As software developers, we know how software development works
internally.  If you want to most rightfully charge for software in
correspondence to how the real work happens, that is the labor of
software development, then you must charge by the softwre development
as a service methodology.  It is the only way to be honest about the
financial happenings and constraints of software development.

"But wait," you interject.  "What about games?"  Today, video games
are no longer primarily software development, modern game development
has been designed so that all the hard work of software development is
embodied in the _game engine_.  As it turns out, the primary work item
unit being sold on the game market is not the game engine, but it is
the game art.  Yes, selling video games is just another way of selling
art, so most of the tenets of art development and commercial
management can be applied there, and the software aspect can be cut
out of the picture.  The software development work embodied within the
game engine is funded by a business-to-business sale between the game
engine developer and the game developer.

The final customer, the potential fool of a customer, who buys games
as sold per unit copy, is therefore realizing they are buying a copy
of art, for the sake of entertainment.  Yes, just like buying a song,
a movie, ceramic pottery, paintings, and so on.  They are totally
insulated from the dynamics of software development.  The thing about
art is that it is generally well understood that the fair market value
of art can be priced much higher than the cost to duplicate it.
Sometimes there is a political motivation: because art is expensive,
showcasing that you've paid for art is a "power move," a way to show
off that you are rich and a person of influence.  Other times, it is
because people feel bad about their life circumstances: it is boring
or depressing, they want a means of escape, but are not thinking about
the costs involved.  In either case, it can be argued that there is a
degree of foolishness involved.  I mean, seriously.  If you just need
entertainment, there are many ways you can entertain yourself for
free.

----------

But realy, let's back up.  All that being said, what are some major,
big-business areas in the economy in general?

Mass market, slim profit margins:

* Agriculture, food distribution, clothing manufacture/distribution,
  other consumer staple goods production and distribution

* Recycling and garbage services

* Law enforcement: military, police officers, lawyers, judges,
  notaries

* Landscaping services

* Transportation, road building and maintenance

* General shipping and distribution

* Construction, building maintenance

* Fire control department

* Banking and financial services

* Health care: medical, dental, vision, emergency medicine, etc.

* Religious services and orders

* Education

* Art and entertainment development, party services

* Hospitality: restaurant and hotel businesses

* Utilities: mail, water, sewage, gas, electricity, fire alarm,
  telecommunications

* News review and editing

* Directory services (phone book, web search engines, etc.), library
  and archival services, records management

* Electronics and computer manufacturing

Mass market, high profit margins:

* Real estate: rental properties (apartments, mall rental space), land
  taxes

* Insurance: health insurance (medical, dental, vision), house
  insurance, car insurance

* Publishing companies: books, movie theater popcorn (yes, it's part
  of the movie publishing deal!), music, online marketplaces,
  subscription television (satellite/cable TV, subscription Internet
  video streaming), video game, advertisement publishing, etc.

* Stock index/plan managers: 401(k) plan managers, stock index fund
  plan managers

* Some areas of software development, the big money counterpart to
  computer manufacturing.  PLEASE NOTE... TODO!

These slim profit area will never have a corresponding high profit
area:

* Religious services and orders.  Although there are religious
  publishers and they typically don't operate as non-profits, they try
  to keep very slim profit margins and effectively operate as close to
  a non-profit as possible.

These slim profit areas, I haven't really found a corresponding high
profit area:

* News review and editing
* Directory services (and similar)

Notes about this classification:

* Food.  Pleasure food, especially beverages like tea, coffee, soft
  drinks, etc.  Special spices.  Although these have higher profit
  margins than the essentials, they are not high enough.

* Standardized testing agencies, the big money counterpart to
  education.  But, do they really make _that_ much money compared to
  the other mentioned parties here?

* Although there are some unscrupulous for-profit recyclers, their
  profit is not substantial.

* Although police officers can give out more traffic law violation
  tickets to raise revenue, their profit is not substantial.

* General shipping and distribution is considered a subset of
  publishing.

* Recycling, garbage services, landscaping, and utilities are
  considered but a subset of real estate.

* Additionally, if you consider local county and state government as
  part of real estate, law enforcement and fire control department are
  also part of real estate.

* Since hospitality industry often times depends on surrounding
  businesses or residences, that can also be considered part of real
  estate.

----------

So, one unfortunate thing that has become obvious.  One of the primary
tenets of software and computer technology, the "information
technology" areas of the economy as a primary economic unit such as
news, directory services, library, archival, and records management,
none of there areas have a high profit counterpart.  How do these
areas ever get off the ground, then?  Historically, there have only
been a few options available.

* Be an advertisement publisher to supplement revenue.  This is
  especially common in news review and editing.

* Define yourself as a news _publisher_.  Therefore, you can charge a
  subscription fee and raise revenue by that means.

* Business-to-business relationships.  If you are an archival agency,
  build good connections with universities, academic institutions, and
  anyone with historic research departments.  They will chime in to
  help pay for your expenses to run archival services.

* Sell educational services to help fund research and development.
  This is how many universities and academic institutions perform
  fundraising for research.

* Get yourself a good following of tech-savvy geeks and they will
  donate accordingly to cover your expenses.  Essentially, this is a
  variant of crowdfunding.

* Government funding/subsidies.  Essentially, this is a specialized
  form of business-to-business relationships.  Everyone has to pay
  taxes, so the government is a _de facto_ mass market player.  Once
  the money is with the government, there is only a small number of
  key stakeholders directly in charge of how the money is going to be
  spent (although they are elected through democratic processes), so
  in many ways business deals with the government have similarities to
  dealing with another business.

In the business world in general, business-to-business relationships
is a great way to get a solid stream of revenue for your business.
Often times, there is an existing business that have found a way to
leverage themself into the mass market and has a lot of money stored
up, but they need to get some work done that they know is already
being better done by a small external company.  So, this is when
they're willing to shell out that money to support the outside company
to do the development for them, and proper negotiation here is key to
securing a key business dealing.

And, in fact, as I mentioned earlier, almost all technology businesses
these days are funded by this means.  The really good thing about
this, by being able to do business-to-business dealings to fund
software development, you can tap into the revenue of any sector of
the economy, provided a business operating in that sector is willing
to fund software development directly.

----------

One interesting variant of funding software development that I must
mention.  Providing Internet hosting services.  Especially in the
realm of business-to-business dealings, you could have a customer who
is demanding absolutely enormous hosting resources.  Since live
Internet servers have a definite energy consumption cost, you have a
tangible physical quantity for which you can charge.  On top of that,
you can then easily also include the Internet Service Provider (ISP)
billing, hardware depreciation expenses, and even real estate expenses
(the floor space and rack space consumed by the server computers)
within a single bill to your customer.  Scaled up large enough, you
now have a definite base to tack a little bit more money, and this
will work out to be large enough to fund software development
activities.

----------

So, after all this discussion about how hard it is to do business in
the software development world, I have to come back and answer the
primary question.  How do you set fair prices in the software
business?

Selling the true essence of software, that is a tough sell to make.
If you are a small business trying to get off the ground selling
software as a direct line item of your revenue, you must realize that
you need to sell to a wise customer and not a foolish one, either a
business or a geek community to be specific.

That being said, even though most businesses are indeed wiser than
your direct mass mass market customer, many non-technical business
leaders still have only a limited degree of patience when it comes to
technology research and development.  They are not willing to start
with a totally new and unproven company and are hoping to see some
sign of a software business capable of being a "proven business
partner."  So, how do you even get any such business off the ground
when no mass market business wants to deal with your fledgling
business?  Start with the geek community.

When projects are being incubated in the geek community, you have
plenty of exposure to geeks who are willing to wager the relative
value of your developments compared to other existing developments.
And by doing so, there is the possibility for establishing a financial
baseline and work record that can be reasonably convincing when
dealing with business partners.  Finally, once that baseline has been
established and your software business starts dealing with the
business world, the business world amongst themselves is responsible
for setting the prices they're willing to pay for development on your
line of software products as they become older, and this is destined
to constantly go down.

So, here is the key to remember.  The only way to keep making money as
a software business is to keep making fundamentally new software
products.  When a software product, as defined by its key features and
functions, appears to become "old," the business world will naturally
be less willing to pay as much for it as they once did.  Even as the
product grows in sophistication, features, and functions, this tenet
still holds true, especially as most of your business shifts away from
the geek community and into the business world.  You've got to keep
pushing out radically new software technologies whose value is
unproven in the business community until the geek community makes the
first move commanding higher prices for the tech, then the business
community will follow without thinking it through and make their
payout.

So... again, it sounds like I may have segwayed off of topic, so I'll
ask the question again, this time with a final definitive answer.  How
do you set fair prices in the software business?  The primary, most
fair price to set for software is to bill for software development as
a research and development service directly.  The principal value of
radically new such development is zero.  Otherwise, if you're hoping
for a growing valuation, ask the geek community for a specific number.
If you are okay with a non-zero but shrinking valuation, research the
prices software is going for when selling to the business world at
large.

Come on, come on, don't just give me a wishy-washy answer like that,
show me some clear numbers!  Okay, fine, let'd do this.

Baseline salary of an entry level software engineer in a typical
proprietary company in the United States in 2015 is around $50,000
U.S. dollars.

Let's assume there is another lower rate for open-source software
developers.  Billed at $20/hour, their corresponding yearly salary for
40 hours a week is around $40,800.  Okay, so that's not too much
different.

Now, we want to grade what kinds of software development can be
completed in what kinds of periods of time, at the low $20/hour rate.
At the same time, we take the paid job rate and compare it with the
true appraised market rate.

* 1 hour coding challenge: $20 paid contract, $0 market rate (answers
  available for free online).

* 30 minute coding challenge: $10 paid contract, $0 market rate
  (answers available for free online).

* 10 minute answer to a technical question, a few lines of example
  code: $3.33 paid contract, $0 market rate (answers available for
  free online).

So, the hard truth be told.  Software development is only considered
to be worth any amount of money when it is done in big chunks of time.
Then it is disproportionally worth more money than the sum of its
parts would be worth.

But, hold on, hold on, if you want to make payments for these small
activities, you need to setup payment and billing information.  How
much does that cost?

* Buy a widget online via PayPal or similar expedited payment broker
  service: 5 minutes, $1.67 paid contract, $0 market rate.  Why do I
  have to pay for the time it takes you to setup payment?

* Setup payment information for an hourly or salaried job: 1 hour, $20
  paid contract, $0 market rate.  Why do I have to pay for the time it
  takes you to setup payment?

Probably the smallest chunk of software development that can be
appraised at any market value is one person working on software
development for a month, assuming this is the first time doing the
work and you have to pay for some 2 weeks additional time to get setup
in a specific environment or the like.  That means they only spend 2
weeks doing the actual software development you're paying for, but
that's okay, that's plenty if you're expecting software development
out of a single person for a relatively simple task.  So, what is that
in the numbers?

* $20/hour * 40 hours/week * 4 weeks/month = $3200.

Yes, that sounds reasonable, a small software development task can be
completed at market rate for about $3000.

After the setup costs have been paid for, it can be reasonably
expected that additional commercially valuable work can be paid for in
a one week or even one day interval.

* $20/hour * 40 hours/week = $800.

* $20/hour * 8 hours/day = $160.

Looks good to me.  Under some circumstances, we're actually seeing
matchups between the market rate and the corresponding cost.

But really, what can these periods of time buy you in terms of a
tangible software product?

* 1 day, $160: Custom CLI program, simple GUI/web UI program with
  similar complexity to custom CLI program.

* 1 week, $800: More complex CLI or GUI program, fix all the bugs in
  the remainder of the week.

* 1 month, $3200: Still a relatively simple GLI/GUI program, but with
  a range of convincing features and functions that fill a niche
  application.  I mean, yeah, this is very saleable for that amount of
  money, but you're not going to get a full backend monolith with a
  tiny, simplified GUI developed by one person to top it off.  You'll
  get a simplified front-end with a simplified back-end.

  Alternatively, another possible sell: re-architect a relatively
  complex software component.  In the business world, this is often
  times a tough sell to make.  Business leaders don't want to pay for
  it directly.  However, if you look at the total cost state of
  affairs, this doesn't really cost much money in the grand scheme of
  things because major refactoring only happens every once and a
  while.  But, more pressing is not the fact that this results in
  additional expenses, but it results in additional time delays on
  when new feature developments can be fulfilled, because doing so is
  more financially efficient (and team negotiable) when done in a lump
  rather than thinly distributed over long periods of time.

  But wait, there's another approach.

These prices and the results are fair for business-to-business
dealings, but you're not going to make nearly as much money mileage
when dealing with little peeople directly.  Often times, you can
develop the same degree of complexity, but the market value to pay in
return is zero.

However, as a collorary to this, if you're working in a big business,
that fact often times applies to your coworkers directly.  If you ask
them, are they willing to pay that price?  The answer is no, but your
making that much money anyways.  The big bosses, looking at the
investment of time and computing the money, yeah they can agree on
those expenses, but then we're right back to where we started: you can
do business-to-business dealings, but you can't sell to the community
directly.

----------

Also, finally, another important thing that I didn't completely
mention.  How does government funding relate to how "proven" or how
old a technolgy must be before they fund development in it?
Generally, government funding for technology development is a
hyper-manifestation of the business world's unwillingness to adopt new
technology.  The government will only adopt technology once it has
become _really_ old and proven, so it can be very stable and relied on
in the government.  There is, however, an important exception.
Government funding of research is a thing, and when they do put
forward the money, they may be willing to take risks equal to, or even
bigger than, what the business world at large is willing to fund.

There's also another curious mention of ease of sales and development
relating to hardware versus software.  Hardware is hard to develop,
software is easy to develop.  On the other hand, hardware is easy to
sell, software is hard to sell.  Selling a product is easier than
selling a service simply because (1) you are doing a one-time sell and
(2) the total amount of money the buyer must invest is less.  Sure,
software development can be a one-time sell for developing only a
specific item, but the problem still remains that the amount of money
paid at once is still very large.  However, with hardware, the widget
price is only economic if you can rely on selling an absolutely
massive number of them to distribute the engineering cost thinly
across all of them.

Crowdfunding is the most straightforward way to tackle the lump sum
payment problem with software development.  A community of people pool
together money for the software development, then the money is spent
on the comitted schedule to deliver whatever results come out of it.
Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that the community will receive a
clearly understood result.  They have to understand the nature of what
they're paying for: they're buying research.  So long as that's the
agreement, it works very well.

Arguably, however, from a business standpoint, crowdfunding for
research fundraising is tougher than would be the case of
business-to-business dealing, if only you didn't have the problem of
businesses being so risk-averse with new software development.  The
thing is, dealing with a small community is esay, but dealing with a
large community is hard.  The fact is, business leaders are but a
small number of people representing the larger community, so that's
what makes big business deals easy.  It is simply hard for a large
number of people to agree on something, except under exceptional
circumstances.  But also... even so with the business dealings, you
have a corresponding problem that big business leaders may only want
to deal with other big business leaders, little people like you are
out of the equation.  That's a great thing about communities, they're
more willing to fund little people than business leaders.

----------

A related subject is the topic of getting employed in a software
development/engineering role in a big company.  This is actually
rather surprisingly similar to the challenge of doing software
business with big business.  It's not easy to get hired directly by a
big business to do software development/engineering.  Typically, you
must at the very least have a college degree, plus a few years of
professional experience.  Getting a college degree is conceivably
straightforward.  But, how do you get those years of professional
experience?  You have to start at a company that is willing to hire
someone with only a college degree, of which there are fewer, and
these either tend to be big companies willing to take a risk or small
companies that simply have less bureaucracy.

Finally, there is a possible, alternate path into big business that
does not require a college degree at all.  Get started at a small
company where they are more willing to hire folks without a college
degree.  Then, once you get enough years of professional experience at
such companies, the door is pretty much wide open to work at any
company.
