---
layout: post
title: Apple product leaks, working at Apple, Apple's facilities
date: 2020-10-14 01:51 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Interesting, folk here agreeing that Apple needs to make a new and
different design, rather than carry on the same aluminum design for
decades.  But this time, they wrote an article of their own.

20201013/https://www.cultofmac.com/546941/imac-design/

Interesting articles about Apple product leaks.  Apple really wants
secrecy regarding their products until the official unveiling.  But,
in recent years, many products had info leaked before their official
unveiling.

20201013/https://www.cultofmac.com/725357/apple-leaks-must-make-things-completely-crazy-in-cupertino/  
20201013/https://www.cultofmac.com/722873/jon-prosser-time-flies-event-predictions/

This is interesting.  Accidentally butt-dialing a purchase for
expensive Tesla upgrades, and Elon Musk joking that it was a good
thing?  Yes.

20201013/https://www.cultofmac.com/724915/tesla-owner-accidentally-butt-dialed-a-4280-in-app-purchase-on-his-iphone/

Elon Musk comments on Steve Jobs and Apple electric vehicle
initiative.

20201013/https://www.cultofmac.com/401950/elon-musk-i-met-steve-jobs-and-he-was-a-jerk/

<!-- more -->

Apple's extreme emphasis on form?  Well, that has been a detriment for
two employees who walked into glass and was injured in Apple's new
corporate headquarters building that features extensive glass design.

More about Apple's building, they call it Apple Park.  I personally
don't like it, I feel it espouses too much suburban sprawl and lack of
virtue in its practical design in evoking a centralized office space
that requires the stemming of a lot of motor vehicle traffic.  It
seems out-of-date for today's world.  That kind of design was a good
idea in the 1990s, but come on, it was finished in the late 2010s, and
now it's the year 2020.

I do admire Steve Job's idea to redevelop the land to a nature refuge,
but I'm drawing the line there.  I think it was a poor idea to try to
also situate an office building in that area, though, it would have
been better if it were a neighborhood.  But then, yeah, you wouldn't
have it under corporate control, first it would go to the government,
then the ultimate control would be under the individual homeowner land
owners.

20201013/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_Park  
20201013/https://www.wired.com/story/apple-parks-tree-whisperer/

Other info I've found about Apple Park.

20201013/DuckDuckGo is the apple park spaceship office really hyped  
20201013/https://www.macworld.co.uk/feature/apple/complete-guide-apple-park-3489704/#openplanunhappiness  

I imagine working at Apple Park isn't considered all that great by
those who do.  And indeed, it isn't, their focus is on other things
when working at Apple, like the stress and the large amount of time
they have to spend.

20201013/DuckDuckGo what is working at apple like  
20201013/https://www.macobserver.com/tmo/article/what-its-really-like-to-work-for-apple  

Oh, but this.  Apple shows its true face, contractors are an important
part of Apple's workforce, yes indeed for hardware and software
development too, but they are treated as second-class citizens.

20201013/https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2019-02-11/apple-black-site-gives-contractors-few-perks-little-security

For reference, the Pentagon spans a similar area as Apple Park, but
has more floor space inside the building.

20201013/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Pentagon
