---
layout: post
title: "Bill Gates does **not** have a GitHub account, other
        interesting facts about Bill Gates"
date: 2020-02-07 17:36 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [misc]
tags: [misc]
---

Now, surely I've asked this question before, but it's worth asking
again.  Does Bill Gates have a GitHub account?

Well, it's hard to get an answer to that question, but a related
question has quite a worthy answer to cover.  Does Bill Gates have a
Facebook account?  Maybe, it's hard to say if he really has one or
there was just some faker out there.  Nevertheless, his E-mail address
from a Windows fanboy website lists "B.Gates@Microsoft.com", so
chances are if you see a similar username, it's likely to be the real
one... like that commenter on Ubuntu Bug #1.  What about his
smartphone?  Well, he's been seen with an iPhone once before, claiming
that although he thought Windows phone to be better, he wanted to see
exactly how much better Windows Phone is than iPhone.

20200207/DuckDuckGo does bill gates have a github account
20200207/https://www.quora.com/Does-Bill-Gates-have-a-smartphone-or-a-Facebook-account?share=1  
20200207/https://www.quora.com/What-phone-and-computer-does-Bill-Gates-use

20200207/https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+bug/1

B Gates wrote:

> As far as I am concerned, this behavior works as expected. It should
> be marked as a feature, not a bug.

Okay okay... maybe that was just a joke too.

<!-- more -->

This is a great article about how Microsoft saved Apple in the '90s by
making an investment... that was booed by the Apple fan crowd, but was
nonetheless a great decision in the long run.  If it was a zero-sum
game, Apple would loose for sure.  It didn't have to be, and the Apple
user base was too big to have to fail like that, and they realized if
they didn't have to play that game, if they rediscovered who Apple was
supposed to be, they could live on.

20200207/https://cnbc.com/2017/08/29/steve-jobs-and-bill-gates-what-happened-when-microsoft-saved-apple.html

Now, here's an interesting article about Bill Gates on
SuperyachtFan.com... Bill Gates does **not** own a yacht, though he is
frequently seen spending time on yachts of business partners or
renting out time on a yacht.  But this page does go on to list the
many other things that Bill Gates does own.

20200207/https://www.superyachtfan.com/bill-gates-house.html
