---
layout: post
title: Teamwork versus problem solving
date: 2020-06-30 11:08 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [tour-de-force]
tags: [tour-de-force]
---

Teamwork versus problem solving?  Now that's an interesting phrase to
start with.  Don't you mean teamwork _and_ problem solving?  No,
actually I don't.  This is a rather interesting hypothesis to have
here, so I will detail my observations behind this.

Suppose you have a math problem you need to solve.  It's not a hard
problem, it just involves some general purpose logical reasoning and
basic high school algebra knowledge.  In other words, problem solving
knowledge legally mandated, by law, in most jurisdictions, by virtue
of the fact that this is an education requirement for receiving a high
school diploma.  Surprisingly, though this sounds like a
"tongue-in-cheek" metaphorical joke statement to say, it's not.  So,
me thinking this is an easy problem that anyone should be able to
solve, I consider the idea of asking friends and family to simply
review my workflow to solving the problem.  But... I think this
through, and given how little motivation they have toward mathematical
engagement, I decicde it wouldn't be a good idea.  Nope, I have to
look around elsewhere to find people who are truly motivated.

<!-- more -->

Now, you can see the problem emerging.  I can't simply just be led to
believe that if I build a team, they will be able to solve problems.
That simply just isn't the case.  I am, in effect, a member of these
teams, but these teams only have an interest in very specialized
areas.  Any time there is a prompt for them to operate as a team
outside of their specialized area, there will, in essence, be a
"panic."  But, to put this another way, for the actual teams I have in
mind, their response will be more to try to justify why they are right
not to have to solve the problem, give up, forget about it, and find
more entertaining things to do instead.

So, we have a problem.  The problem is that most teams are
ill-equipped to being able to solve problems in general.  Usually, the
problem with teams, especially those built around friends and family,
is that they are united by some sort of activity that does not entail
problem solving, whether it be recreation, recreational cooking,
entertainment, religious worship, or similar.  And often times, when
it comes to workplaces, these are precisely the activities that are
looked to for the sake of "team building."  The point in hand is that
it is generally understood that teams have an additional expense line
to be accounted for, and that is the cost of building the team itself.

But, as my discussion was alluding to, the definition and limits of a
team goes further than that.  The idea, the underlying premise, behind
most team building activities is that the primary impediment to the
functioning of a good team is simply lack of effective communication
due to lack of trust among team members.  So, if you simply get folks
to go through the motions in a low-stress test environment like that
of games and the like, and they come out just fine, then you know they
will be ready to tackle real problems.  But, the real problem is that
even with good communications within a team, most teams themselves are
still ill-equipped to being able to tackle tough problems.

So, if you've got a tough problem that needs to be solved, how do you
build a team that can tackle that problem?  The primary thing that you
have to understand is that humans don't naturally operate in teams,
especially teams that have the capacity to solve very challenging
problems.  Humans primarily operate naturally in groups.  That is,
collections of individuals who don't have a shared stake in a
collective outcome, but rather each individual has their own
individual stakes in their own outcomes.  What unites them is the
similarity of their stakes, not the collective unification into one
stake.  So yes... what it comes down to first is to recognize this is
the primary building block of most human interactions, in fact of all
human life itself.  That people will look to others first and foremost
to see how what other people know can improve their outcome in their
own stake.

So, look to yourself.  Are you willing yourself to take on solving
very tough problems?  Then look around to see if you've found a group
of such others who have met together.  Online communities organized as
forums are a really great place to start for this.  The primary
element of a team willing to solve very tough problems is that the
individual members are willing to solve very tough problems.  Why is
this?  The problem with challenging problems is that success does not
rely on communication alone.  Solving a complex problem does not
primarily hinge on trust in another person.  When an individual person
comes down to approaching a complex problem, the problem speaks for
itself, and it is ruthless in what it says.

It doesn't care about your emotional insecurities and anxieties, but
if you do have any when prompted with the challenge, it will promptly
twist your arm and turn those against you.  The complex problem will
provoke your emotions, and then your emotions will be turned into
clubs and battalions that beat you down.  If you think you can turn
around and try to prove a point that you are right and it is wrong, it
will rebutt you by showing you the evidence that no, you really were
wrong.  And if you, yourself, cannot admit that and turn around and
continue to work on the problem...  If you think you need external
emotional support from another person, you are asking for too much.
Why?  They'll simply never be able to provide what you feel you need
when you are prompted with a complex problem to solve.

So, that's about all I can say on the subject, but incidentally just
about all that can be said.  If you think you've found a complex
problem to solve, you're going to need to expect to spend a lot of
time with the problem just between you and yourself, because it's
going to take a long while to find a suitable group if it comes down
to needing to find a group to finish tackling the problem.  By
contrast, if you've think you've found an easy task to perform, then
you will have absolutely no trouble bringing it to a group or team to
perform.  100%, by all means, when it comes to groups and teams, you
need to be obsessed with the answer to the question: what is the least
you can ask of other people?  Heck, that's the oft-repeated adage in
negotiation in general.

Oh, finally there's one last note.  Complex problems are not humans
only arch-nemesis, but so is mundane and repetitive labor.  Too
difficult and pepople will give up, too easy and people will also give
up.  On the other hand, for the easy, mundane, and repetitive labor,
we have found an obvious solution that has proven successful ever
since ancient times: just throw more people ath the problem, and for
those working at it, pay them enough that they're not going to go
elsewhere.

Or, consider this more modern approach, made possible only by the
Internet: simply by dividing up any job into a billion components each
so small it is novel rather than mundane to the human laborer, then
scaling it across a billion volunteers are are willing to do the task
for a short period of time before they get bored.  The primary problem
with most traditional physical labor is the time that is required for
commuting to the job site results in diminishing returns for smaller
tasks, and this is exacerbated when you multiply the number of job
sites and completely disparate, unrelated labor to be done.  The
Internet totally eliminates commutes measured by the minute, so
completing several disparate tasks that are only a few minutes in
length becomes a reality.  Alas, the other problem with this approach
is that it divides the pay so small that transactional costs in
traditional electronic payment systems easily exceed the value of the
task performed.  So, typically these tasks are structured around the
assumption that they pay with an entertainment reward rather than a
financial reward, since that is one of the most popular reasons that
many people turn to the Internet, when they are not using it for
communications with another person in particular.

In modern workforces, the successful application of these human
factors upon laborers to result in a system where human laborers are
actually getting useful work done, despite their internal
characteristics that would lead one to believe they are not capable of
otherwise doing so, has become such an applied science that it is
often times very difficult for new businesses to start precisely
because of these reasons.  There's just so much competition from the
big, established businesses that can scale their workforce and
proportionally scale their productive output to no end that it can
become hard for new businesses to find employees willing to do new
tasks, unless they intend to operate using one of the old and already
proven business labor models.

----------

Now, time for my personal reflection.  This is the reason why most
software is written in a rather repetitive manner.  This is the reason
why programers perfer simple concepts that are mundane and repetitive,
extended out for a large number of repetitions.  It is, indeed, just a
extension of the reason why human laborers in general have this
preference.  I don't like it, I know the result is a terrible bloated
mess for the computer to have to wade through on the back-end, but
given all the factors you have since described, I can see why modern
software has overwhelmingly taken on this form.  And, to make matters
worse, why most people honestly don't care that modern software is a
mess.

You know what I think?  Why'd you have to be right?  It's clearly not
a good idea what we, as a human society, are working ourselves into,
this kind of software structure is going to slow us down in the long
run, and if it's the only thing at our disposal, eventualy we are
going to just see diminishing returns on what computers are capable
of.  And, well, yes, that's just it: that's exactly what we are seeing
going on in the commercial computer world.

Why did this form of human labor ever work in the past of human
history?  The answer, is, well, of course, it didn't.  It was merely a
compromise that was better than the alternatives.  The primary problem
that humans faced in ancient times that held them back was that of
depreciation: the inability of humans to craft durable tools and
information repositories was what held them back.  The half-hearted
approach was to throw more human labor at the problem, to rebuild what
was constantly being lost, and obviously that didn't solve the
underlying problem, it merely mitigated secondary factors caused
because of the underlying problem.  Namely, the lack of tools and
information being available at hand.

In modern times, we have not only found a solution to the problem of
depreciation in information technology, software in particular, but it
has become ubiquitous.  In some sense this is rather phenomenal since
throughout most of the early history of computers, computer platforms
were constantly being created and destroyed, but now we have
stabilized on a durable base of software technologies that isn't going
to become obsolete any time in the foreseeable future, though hardware
technologies still remain constantly in flux.  This is a tremendous
gift that we have, the problem we face is not an external one, but
rather an internal one: it is that we humans seemingly remain too
foolish to be able to leverage the gift we have available.  Most
humans are in great need to reinvent their minds to understanding how
to interact with a world where depreciation does not happen, and by
far the biggest requirement is being able to have an excellent
penchant for organizing complex environments.
