---
layout: post
title: "Explanation of calculating number e"
date: 2020-05-30 14:08 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [unlipic]
tags: [unlipic]
---

Number e... a very important number that most of us have memorized to
about 10 digits, i.e. 2.71828182846, but how do you compute it?  Let's
review the definition of number e as it is typically presented, in the
problem of compound interest.

Non-compound interest is defined as follows:

```
A = P * r * t
```

"Annual equals principal times rate times time."  This tells us how
much interest money is generated over the given time period.  If we
want to know the total money, we rephrase the equation as follows,
using `I` instead of `r`.

```
P_t = P_0 * (1 + I * t)
```

Non-compound quarterly interest that is assigned a yearly interest
rate is defined as follows.

```
P_t = P_0 * (1 + I/4 * (4*t))
```

<!-- more -->

This can be trivially seen to be the same as the annual interest
equation.

Interest _compounded_ annually is defined primarily as a recurrence
relation.

```
P_(t+1) = P_t * (1 + I)
```

By some simple analysis, you see that you can rewrite as an equation
this by raising `(1 + I)` to the power of `t`.

```
P_t = P_0 * (1 + I)^t
```

Now, what if we want to compound quarterly rather than annually?
Simply put, if `t` is equal to one year, we want to effectively have
compounded 4 times rather than just one, so we put a factor of 4 in
the exponent.  But since we want the overall yearly interest to be
about the same, we also divide `I` by 4.

```
P_t = P_0 * (1 + I/4)^(4*t)
```

We can compound at smaller time intervals by defining a variable `n`
for the compounding frequency.

```
P_t = P_0 * (1 + I/n)^(n*t)
```

Now, what happens if we simplify this to the case where `I = 100%`,
`P_0 = 1`, and `t = 1`?  We get the following simplified equation.

```
P_1 = (1 + 1/n)^n
```

If we evaluate this with different values of `n`, we can see that it
converges to constant as `n` approaches infinity.  That constant is
number e.

```
lim_{n -> oo} (1 + 1/n)^n = e
```

However, if we evaluate this directly with a calculator using a
conventional number of floating point bits of precision, what kinds of
values do we get in practice?

```
n = 10, e = 2.594
n = 100, e = 2.705
n = 1000000, e = 2.7182805
n = 1000000000, e = 2.71828170574
n = 1000000000000, e = 1.0
n = 100000000000, e = 2.71828129627
```

These results are rather abysmal since `1/n` gets so tiny as `n` grows
large, and then we have to try to raise what looks like a roundoff
error to a very high power.  Surely, there's a better way to compute
number e, isn't there?  Indeed, there is.  Wikipedia gives an
unexplained magic solution that is much more numerically stable to
evaluate and converges rapidly.

```
e = 1/0! + 1/1! + 1/2! + 1/3! + 1/4! + ...
= sum_{n = 0}^{oo} 1/n!
```

20200602/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Number_e

But how and why does that work?  Here, I present the explanation that
is the missing link between these two equations.

The trick to reformulating the equation is the _binomial theorem_.
The binomial theorem presents an easy way to expand any binomial
raised to the nth power into a polynomial series of terms.

```
P(n, 2) = n*(n - 1)
P(n, 3) = n*(n - 1)*(n - 2)
P(n, r) = n!/(n - r)!
C(n, r) = P(n, r)/r! = n!/((n - r)! * r!)

(a + b)^n = C(n, 0) * a^n + C(n, 1) * a^(n - 1)*b +
  C(n, 2) * a^(n - 2)*b^2 + C(n, 3) * a^(n - 3)*b^3 + ... +
  C(n, n) * a^(n - n)*b^n
= sum_{x = 0}^n C(n, x) * a^(n - x)*b^x
```

For small binomial coefficients, they can also be easily computed
using Pascal's triangle.

```
         1
        1 1
       1 2 1
      1 3 3 1
     1 4 6 4 1
   1 5 10 10 5 1
  1 6 15 20 15 6 1
 1 7 21 35 35 21 7 1
1 8 28 56 70 56 28 8 1
```

Fortunately, the number e equation is a binomial raised to the nth
power, so we can use the binomial theorem expansion to rephrase the
equation.  Let's do that.

```
n = 5 expansion:

a^5 + 5*a^4*b + 10*a^3*b^2 + 10*a^2*b^3 + 5*a*b^4 + b^5
= 1^5 + 5*1^4*(1/n) + 10*1^3*(1/n)^2 + 10*1^2*(1/n)^3 + 5*1*(1/n)^4 +
  (1/n)^5
= 1 + 5/n + 10/n^2 + 10/n^3 + 5/n^4 + 1/n^5
= 1 + 5/5 + 10/5^2 + 10/5^3 + 5/5^4 + 1/5^5
= 1 + 1 + 2/5 + 2/5^2 + 1/5^3 + 1/5^5

= 1 + 1 + 0.4 + 0.08

Factorial series:

1/0! + 1/1! + 1/2! + 1/3!
= 1 + 1 + 0.5 + 0.167

n = 8 expansion:

1 + 8/8 + 28/8^2 + 56/8^3
= 1 + 1 + 0.438 + 0.109
```

What do we see?  Looks like we're seeing pretty much the start of the
factorial series in the first few terms.  What about the last few
terms?  Think about it, if `n` approaches infinity, you will be
raising `1/n` to a very high power, so the term will be
insignificantly small and not really factor into the final result.
So, let's see what we can find out if we take the limit as `n`
approaches infinity on the first few terms.  Fortunately, since the
first term in the binomial is one, that pretty much drops out of the
simplified term equation.

```
C(n, x) * (1/n)^x

x = 2
n*(n - 1) / (2! * n^2)
lim_{n -> oo} n*(n - 1) / (2! * n^2) = 1/2!

x = 3
n*(n - 1)*(n - 2) / (3! * n^3)
lim_{n -> oo} n*(n - 1)*(n - 2) / (3! * n^3) = 1/3!
```

Okay, the pattern should be clear now.  Computing permutations at the
limit?  When you try to add or subtract a constant from infinity, it
is negligibly small compared to your very large number, so it can
basically be dropped out and ignored.  Then you can just substitute
`n` anywhere you see `n - c`.  Happy, because of the structure of our
binomial, we are also dividing by `n` raised to an equivalent power as
the factors of the permutation, so those factors cancel out, leaving
us with just the `1/x!` factor from our combinatorial computation.
Now that we know each term can be simplified to `1/x!` when `n`
approaches infinity, we can rewrite our limit-transformed binomial
theorem expansion:

```
e = sum_{x = 0}^{oo} 1/x!
```

And that's how we derive the factorial series that Wikipedia just
magically presented without fully explaining.  (Except, in hindsight,
for giving a vague hint.)

With that knowledge in hand, we can not only happily compute `e` to
whatever number of bits of precision we may need, but we also have an
excellent numerically stable computational tool for computing any
binomial raised to a power.  When a binomial has rational terms, we
can rephrase it using the binomial theorem to get a more efficient
computational form.

----------

Now, what about that vague hint that Wikipedia gives?  Taking a second
look at a Calculus book, I see what they are hinting at.  They are
hinting at using the Maclaurin series expansion of `e^x`, which
results in a power series.  Then, the power series is evaluated at one
to compute `e`.  However, the problem with this technique is that it
requires you to know the derivate of `e^x` in advance, and how can you
even determine the derivative rule for that accurately if you don't
even have an accurate computational result for the number?

Well, maybe it's worth a try just for posterity.  The function `e^x`
can be expressed as follows:

```
e^x = lim_{n -> oo} (1 + 1/n)^(n*x)
```

Now we want to use Newton's difference quotient on this.

```
lim_{h -> 0} (e^(x + h) - e^x) / h
```

Now this is looking ugly, but let's try it anyways.

```
lim_{h -> 0} lim_{n -> oo} ((1 + 1/n)^(n*(x+h)) - (1 + 1/n)^(n*x)) / h
= lim_{h -> 0} lim_{n -> oo} ((1 + 1/n)^(n*x+n*h) - (1 + 1/n)^(n*x)) / h
= lim_{h -> 0} lim_{n -> oo} ((1 + 1/n)^(n*x) * (1 + 1/n)^(n*h) -
                              (1 + 1/n)^(n*x)) / h
= lim_{h -> 0} lim_{n -> oo} (1 + 1/n)^(n*x) * ((1 + 1/n)^(n*h) - 1) / h
```

Now if `h` is approaching zero, one of the exponents will approach
zero.  On the other hand, the other exponent is approaching infinity.
But hold on, we can use a limit rule to simplify this right here.

```
= lim_{n -> oo} (1 + 1/n)^(n*x) * lim_{h -> 0} ((1 + 1/n)^(n*h) - 1) / h
= e^x * lim_{n -> oo} lim_{h -> 0} ((1 + 1/n)^(n*h) - 1) / h
```

Now we can clearly see there is a factor of `e^x` in this mix,
independent of the difference quotient limit.  It's hard to do very
much more here, other than to show that with some simple rephrasing,
we're almost right back to where we started.

```
= e^x * lim_{n -> oo} lim_{h -> 0} (1 + 1/n)^(n*h) / h - 1 / h
= e^x * lim_{h -> 0} (e^h - 1) / h
```

I'm pretty much stuck trying to attempt that.

By the way, my silly Calculus textbook (Single Variable Calculus:
Early Transcendentals, Seventh Edition, by James Stewart, published by
Brooks/Cole Copyright 2012, 2008, ISBN-10 0-538-49867-6) simply
defined number e such that the following holds true:

```
lim_{h -> 0} (e^h - 1) / h = 1
```

Well that sure makes it easy to finish this limit computation!

Now, if we computed number e in advance, with sufficient accuracy
(thus only possible using the rephrased formula), that is sure easy to
believe why it would hold true.

```
2.71828182846^0.000001 - 1 = 0.000001
0.000001 / 0.000001 = 1.0
```

And indeed, my derivation using limits on terms of the binomial
theorem does not rely on assuming you know the derivative of `e^x`.
But, how you would prove the previous symbolically without prior
knowledge of the computational result, I am not sure of such a method
at the moment.

Well... now here's the real trick.  By circular reasoning about why we
definitely know power series to hold true regardless of not knowing
the value of number e, we can start my making that assumption and then
prove that the result of evaluating the power series does in fact
result in a consistent computation formula for number e.  And that's
how we prove that the derivative of `e^x` is in fact `e^x`, and
therefore the limit also holds true.

Long story short, it's easier to be able to directly compute number e
without needing to rely on any assumptions about its derivative when
phrasing up your computational formula.
