---
layout: post
title: "Is Ubuntu still relevant?"
date: 2020-11-03 13:22 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [unix]
tags: [unix]
---

So, recently I've upgraded from Ubuntu 18.04 LTS to Ubuntu 20.04 LTS,
and my first impression?  I didn't really like what I saw.  I mean, to
be honest, I'll say overall it felt like two steps forward, two steps
backward.  Ubuntu still works for my limited use case of a very simple
desktop with a restricted range of installed software, but I feel it
has fallen far from being the best "desktop" distro.

And that's right, they're not.  They're primarily focused on software
developers targeting powerful, high-end computer hardware.
Accessibility, heck that's a far cry from their current mission
statement, but they've thought to include it in a bullet point.  No
longer is Ubuntu primarily a billionare's humanitarian effort, it is
now Canonical's means to make billions of dollars.  Cloud, server, IoT
development.  That's what they're targeting, and it will be their
mission on an IPO.

So, yes, derivatives like PopOS and Linux Mint, they're definitely
preferential choices for a GNU/Linux desktop distro.  Actually, I'd
vouch that Raspberry Pi OS would be the best desktop experience if you
want it to be user-friendly.  Well, it can be made to be so.

Now, here's an interesting predicament that came about on the question
of dropping 32-bit support.  Gamers and Ubuntu Studio communities,
they objected heavily to the idea when raised at a later date.  But
speaking with the "developer" channel and Valve Steam, the no concerns
were raised at all in the conversations.  They just didn't really care
or see it as an issue.  Of course not, you know what kinds of
developers those are?

<!-- more -->

Noteworthy is that they mention LXD/LXC and snaps as a container
solution rather than Docker.

20201103/DuckDuckGo who uses ubuntu in 2020  
20201103/https://www.reddit.com/r/linux/comments/c2d9r4/whats_the_point_of_ubuntu_in_2020/  
20201103/https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/intel-32bit-packages-on-ubuntu-from-19-10-onwards/11263  
20201103/https://ubuntu.com/blog/statement-on-32-bit-i386-packages-for-ubuntu-19-10-and-20-04-lts  
20201103/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LXC

This is interesting, well not really.  There were a **ton** of bugs in
the GNOME 3 shell that had to get fixed for Ubuntu to be more
responsive on the desktop.

20201103/https://www.forbes.com/sites/jasonevangelho/2020/05/19/heres-why-ubuntu-linux-2004-feels-insanely-fast-and-responsive/?sh=b99cf136142c
