---
layout: post
title: Very interesting story about first cloned Macintosh computer
date: 2020-10-14 01:39 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [vintage-computing, mac-classic, computer-history]
tags: [vintage-computing, mac-classic, computer-history]
---

Wow, now this is really interesting, a story seldom told.  The
Macintosh actually did get cloned, just like the Apple II.  But,
despite Steve Jobs best efforts to put the "stolen by Apple!"  code
inside the ROM, the cloned Macintosh computer used its own
reverse-engineered ROM without that code.  Also, the story behind the
cloning is very interesting, it was Brazilian military-run government
import restrictions on computers under the guise that they could be
spy devices that motivated the extralegal cloning outside of Apple's
primary jurisdiction.

In the aftermath, the Brazilian government got concerned that the
consortium of U.S. computer manufacturers banding together to propose
trade sanctions on imports of Brazilian shoes, orange juice, and steel
would send Brazil into a total economic disaster, so they
counter-appraised their previous decision and banned the sale of the
Macintosh clones.  The designs were sold off to a Taiwanese company as
a meager effort to keep the company afloat from the tremendous
economic hit this entailed, and Apple's lawyers followed the trail to
ban the Taiwanese company from ever manufacturing those designs.  That
was the last we heard of the Macintosh clones.

20201013/https://www.cultofmac.com/266710/meet-unitron-mac-512-worlds-first-macintosh-clone/

Minor notes about the Macintosh 512K.  Before MultiFinder, Switcher
just partitioned up Macintosh 512K RAM into 4 sections.

20201013/https://www.cultofmac.com/500730/apple-history-fat-mac-quadruples-memory/
