---
layout: post
title: "Acid in wood, acid-free paper purchase, busting versus edge
        crush test"
date: 2020-10-31 15:49 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [inven-sys, raspberry-pi, vintage-computing]
tags: [inven-sys, raspberry-pi, vintage-computing]
---

Wood shelves, yes something that many folks may like for setting up a
vintage gaming console display.  But is it really good for the
systems?  Well, untreated paper has lignin in it that breaks down into
acid over time, so you'd think that wood itself would be similar, even
though the effect may be less extreme.  Indeed, it is.  But, if you
seal wood with two layers of polyethylene lacquer, that does the trick
for protection of most of the acid issue.  Another note, use potato
starch glue if you want acid free glue for bonding cardboard,
interesting.  Or you could just use hot glue, yes.

20201031/DuckDuckGo are wood shelves safe for archival acid  
20201031/https://www.woodweb.com/knowledge_base/Safe_Materials_for_Museum_Storage_Cabinets.html  
20201031/https://ccaha.org/resources/selecting-materials-storage-and-display

Now what is melamine board?  Basically, a dry erase whiteboard.

20201031/DuckDuckGo melamine  
20201031/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melamine

Ah, but hey, here's another note.  You can also use finishing on
cardboard to protect from acid, just like wood.  With, of course, the
disadvantage that it can no longer buffer against humidity.

20201031/DuckDuckGo acid free corrugated cardboard boxes  
20201031/https://answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20070217214711AAI7YGB

<!-- more -->

Looking to buy acid-free corrugated cardboard to make cheap,
recyclable, archival quality shelves and boxes?  Never fear, it is
rather cheap to purchase in large quantity!  Look here for one
retailer, this one in particular buffers the paper (i.e. make it
alkaline to neutralize acids), so not necessarily ideal for all kinds
of objects, $20 for 25 sheets of rather large cardboard.  I also like
corrugated cardboard because you don't need to worry about
condensation on the surfaces like may be the case with impermeable
materials, this can help better protect the internal contents under
non-ideal conditions.  That is, as long as humidity is the risk and
not being soaked in water.

20201031/https://www.talasonline.com/Heritage-Corrugated

What's the difference between bursting strength and edge crush test?
Simple.  Bursting strength is the amount of pressure you must put on a
_face_ of a sheet of corrugated cardboard before it collapses.  It
measures the strength of a box when subject to rough shipping and
handling as an individual unit.  Edge crush test measures the amount
of pressure that must be exerted on teh _edge_ of a sheet of
corrugated cardboard before it collapses.  It principally measures box
stacking strength before the box on the bottom can no longer hold up
the column.  Generally 32 pounds per square inch edge crush test
equates to 200 pounds per square inch bursting test.

20201031/DuckDuckGo edge crush versus bursting strength  
20201031/https://blog.pantero.com/understanding-corrugated-material-strength-ratings-burst-strength-vs.-edge-crush-testing
