---
layout: post
title: "Moving from Win10 virtual machines to a physical machine"
date: 2020-03-18 01:54 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [windows]
tags: [windows]
---

Okay, previously I've covered how to install Windows 10 on a virtual
machine.  But, as things turned out, I ended up scaling up on Windows
10 rather than scaling down... so now I had to go through the ordeal
of figuring out how to install Windows 10 on a physical machine.
Here's what I did.

First of all, I opted to use rewritable media... this meant there
would be no DVD burning or the like.  But this is where I was having
trouble.  First of all, modern Windows 10 images are big, 5+ GB.  This
makes them too large to write to a single-sided DVD, and also too
large to write to many older USB stick flash drives.  So... for my
purposes, I had to resort to using an SD card.

Second... now this complication comes from using an older computer.
The hardware could not boot off of an SD card directly, though it had
an SD card reader.  No worries, I had a USB SD card reader on hand,
and doing that solved that problem.

Well... yes.  The second problem is, of course, because I had an old
laptop, I needed to make sure the image had an MBR boot record.  This
entailed rewriting the image from the ISO to the SD card using special
software.  My attempts at Linux-based software failed, so, lo and
behold, I had to use my Windows 10 virtual machine to run the Rufus
software to write out a proper Master Boot Record image.

20200318/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rufus_(software)  
20200318/https://rufus.ie/

<!-- more -->

Finally, the last problem that I've encountered was that although the
Windows installation started okay, it later halted complaining that a
media driver was not found and I'd have to select the driver install
disk to continue.  But, never fear, there was an easy workaround for
this.  First, cancel out of the installer so that you are back to the
"Start Install" screen.  Now, here's the trick: remove the USB drive
and reinsert it into a different port.  You will now be able to
continue the install just fine.

What exactly is the problem?  Either it "legacy boot" drivers used by
the BIOS when booting off of the drive, or it is a USB 2 versus USB 3
port difference, to my knowledge.  But, what matters is that it made
it work for me.  The referenced site also lists a whole host of other
things to check for if this doesn't work for you.

20200318/DuckDuckGo windows 10 a media driver was not found generic sata  
20200318/https://answers.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/forum/windows_10-windows_install-winpc/media-driver-is-missing-windows-10-installation/3685bca9-05c5-45e8-91a5-27e23b986ea1  
20200318/DuckDuckGo windows 10 a media driver was not found usb install  
20200318/https://www.auslogics.com/en/articles/resolving-a-media-driver-is-missing-error-during-windows-10-clean-install/
