---
layout: post
title: "A different Shine Studios, interesting photographer's approach
        and women's perspective on beauty"
date: 2020-11-08 22:00 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [pentax-k-1-camera]
tags: [pentax-k-1-camera]
---

Shine Studios, the video game maker?  What are there wereabouts on a
web search?  Of course Shine Studios brings up many other different
businesses that are still around.  Very interesting, quite different
idea and practice area though.  Photography to make any ordinary girl
look like a supermodel.  "All women are beautiful."

20201108/DuckDuckGo shine studios  
20201108/https://www.shinestudios.eu/

What are the essential elements that make for a beautiful photograph?
There are only two that I find to be consistent: lighting and posing.
Lighting should be bounce-scatter lighting of a large area light
source so as to eliminate harsh highlights and shadows that exaggerate
wrinkles and the like, especially on the face.  Yes, I know, it's
trying to hide the real "texture" of what makes real photos real, but
it's what people like to see for human subject photography.  And the
posing?  Well, I would have to put together a guidebook on that,
that's quite a bit more challenging.

One important point is that there is no one clothing outfit or
hairstyle that is outright more beautiful than another.  All
variations can be creatively worked out through posing to look good,
regardless of one person's particular preferences.  Likewise can be
said about being out of shape, carrying extra weight, etc.

<!-- more -->

And, what about the results of the photo from a substantiative
perspective of the subject?  The photographer believes having a
beautiful photo of yourself at your best can be a great boost of
self-confidence for those days when you are feeling down and struggle
to see the beauty in yourself.  The photographer herself has found
photos of herself to be beneficial in this regard.

Another interesting note about posing, paraphrasing.  "Being pretty
isn't always comfortable.  Prepare for feeling like you've been
through a good workout after the photoshoot."  Well, now that's an
interesting general idea, are there other ideas on this searching the
Internet?  Indeed, one good point to put forth.  Yes, although beauty
can be a healthy complement for women's self confidence, being known
as a beautiful women 24/7 is challenging.  It makes it harder to build
genuine friendships with both women and men: womem will be constantly
thinking of them as competition or snobby, men will be thinking about
dating them.  Another point, if one makes a habit of using makeup and
lipstick, the converse, the possibility of an anti-complement of not
looking beautiful, is harmful for self-confidence, so this can also
make a vicious cycle where women will want to always put on makeup and
the like.

Also mentioned is a conundrum about women wasting time on makeup and
the like in the morning to look pretty, lest they give up just one day
and get complements that they're not looking so good today.  When
really, it is not looks that gets you through life, but it is brains.

20201109/DuckDuckGo being pretty is not comfortable  
20201109/https://thoughtcatalog.com/kyra-willans/2015/03/7-disappointing-truths-about-being-beautiful/

20201109/https://thoughtcatalog.com/amy-shock/2013/05/how-to-deal-with-the-burden-of-being-a-pretty-girl/  
https://www.quora.com/Can-someone-be-very-beautiful-in-person-but-not-very-photogenic?share=1  

20201109/DuckDuckGo being pretty is not relaxing  
20201109/https://www.huffpost.com/entry/pretty-is-pretty-importan_b_4053171?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly9kdWNrZHVja2dvLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAARH6hfkZinzx8Edm1ZErtPh6HHBvhSh8KQ__kOGA1uKntwhtFNS9ErKzbfsYdjSASmLE1GNFBzsmUdi3VgeYZaqqRKnF5YrgzyNuZ3W7gA6f0tWGQmzlusrmnYMBSFTgCnakwqsVqH5JEh2s2JNnDuf6Et5jqDun4iO7X7Y09FY
