---
layout: post
title: Explaining fundamentals of the stock market in basic terms
date: 2020-02-24 22:10 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [personal-finance]
tags: [personal-finance]
---

The stock market.  Stocks, shares, buying, selling, price goes up,
price goes down.  How does it all work?  How can it work at a very
basic foundational level?  Some careful reading of the mere
introductions on Wikipedia, some careful thought, and most
importantly, some concrete examples are very helpful.

20200224/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_market  
20200224/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock

So first, the basic definitions, simplified for the purposes of our
simple primary example to give first.

* _Equity_ and _capital_ synonyms for money/currency.  Therefore, the
  equity or capital of a company is simply how much money a company
  has.  (More on this later.)

* A _share_ is a fractional ownership of a company out of the total
  number of shares.

So, let's give a simple example.  Suppose a company has $100 in equity
and 10 total shares.  Therefore, the price of one share is 1/10 of the
total equity, or $100 / 10 = $10.  This is how much money a
shareholder can get if they sell one share.

So, let's consider what happens after that action is performed.  The
shareholder now has $10 more money and one less share in the company.
Likewise, the company has $90 in equity and 9 total shares.  As it
turns out, the price of one share is still $10, since $90 / 9 = $10.

<!-- more -->

Okay, so that's easy enough, and that answers the prime question.  How
do you determine the price to set one share for buyers on the stock
market?  The answer is easy andstraightforward: divide the total
equity by total shares to obtain the share price.  Happily enough,
this formula will be completely stable even when the number of actual
buyers is unknown.  The primary variable in the share price is the
business operations of the company.  In its most basic form, the
question of the popularity among shareholders to buy and sell shares
does not affect the price of the share.

Of course, this patticular fact is key: The total number of
shareholders cannot be zero, else you will get a divide-by-zero error.
At the very least, you can define the founder-owner of a company to
own one share in the company, and when there are no other shares
bought, that is the price of one share.

Now, if an already established company wants to list itself on a stock
exchange, one share corresponding to the total equity in a company
would make its stock untenable.  So, you need to _split_ the one share
into multiple shares, effectively decreasing the value of a single
share, but correspondingly multiplying the number of shares that
existing shareholders have.

Suppose you have a "big box store" company that has $1,000,000,000 in
equity but **no** shares, and it wants to list itself on a stock
exchange.  Principally, you start by defining the founder-owner of the
company to have a single share in the company that corresponds to all
of $1,000,000,000 of equity.  Now, you want the target share price to
be $10, so you split the stocks by a factor of 100,000,000.
Therefore, the founder-owner of the company has 100,000,000 shares,
and the share price is $10.

Now, what about dividends?  Well, simply put, a dividend is a payout
per share that effectively decreases the value of a share by that
amount.  So, if a share is worth $12, and there is a dividend payout
of $2 per share, that reduces the value of one share to $10, and each
shareholder earns $2 per share.

20200225/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dividend

In more complex accounting scenarios, a company doesn't just simply
have money, but it also has a combination of assets and liabilities
that together form the net worth of a company that can be represented
as "equity," of which only some of is directly represented in cash
value.  The rest of a company's assets have a dynamic value that is
determined by the market valuation.  Say, for instance, a big box
store owns the land its store is placed on.  That is a tangible asset
that is owned that doesn't have a direct monetary value, but its
monetary value is determined dynamically and indirectly by its market
valuation on the real estate market.  One day, it might be worth
$100,000, the next day, it might be worth $10,000.  Once the value of
such assets are determined, they can be added into the sum of all
assets of a company, which can then determine the total "equity" of a
company.

Therefore, what I said about "equity" being the same as money was an
over-simplification.  Indeed, it is the total value of a company,
which includes both monetary assets, also called "capital," and
non-monetary assets, such as land, tools, materials, etc.

20200225/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accounting_equation

Okay, okay, but what about what that one Mr. Money Mustache article
said about how stocks work?  How can we ever have a market
supply-demand relationship here where when more people rush to buy a
stock, the price goes up?  And, conversely, when a whole bunch of
people sell their stock, the price plummets?

20200226/https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2019/09/12/michael-burry-index-funds/

Well, as it turns out, real world stocks aren't defined so simply.
Rather than being merely a share of equity in a company, they are a
measure of a company's profit.  Thus, nonprofit companies cannot be
listed on stock exchanges.  The profit is principally paid out from
dividends.  When dividends are not paid out, that is principally a
decision to re-invest the profits rather than pay them out to
shareholders.  Apparently by the examples given by Mr. Money Mustache,
with dividend payments, the share price is relatively stable on its
own, but as a company's profits grow, so does the dividend payout grow
proportionally.  Yeah, that all makes sense.

But how exactly is the share price set?  That has something to do with
the "net present value" of all future earnings, so I was told.

20200226/https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value

Okay, let's continue the fleshing out the full definition using simple
terms.  Assume that all of the money exchanged when buying and selling
shares counts toward a company's profitability.  This means that
buying shares increases a company's profits, which means that more
money can be paid out in dividends, and therefore the share prices can
be higher.  Likewise, selling shares decreases a company's profits,
decreases money that can be paid out in dividends, and therefore
decreases the share prices.
