---
layout: post
title: "Philosophical and economic considerations for operating a
        non-trivial home network, with non-engineers involved,
        explaining engineering to business managers"
date: 2020-11-28 17:54 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [home-network, personal-finance]
tags: [home-network, personal-finance]
---

Operating a complex home network network... one of the ultimate ways
of geekery.  I personally have been operating a home network for some
time, and I have to say... if the home network is built just for you
and yourself, well that's easy.  But the moment you consider using a
build-out geek home network that is operating and providing a service
to others, well... sometimes that raises more questions than it
answers.

First of all, you have to answer to the question of the users'
willingness, or more commonly the case, lack thereof willingness to
learn about how the complex network functions.  It's funny, when you
think about this.  This is so baseline, so fundamental of an idea, yet
it's something that many engineers blissfully overlook.  The fact that
you can build fancy technologies that do nice things, that people will
want to use them, but they will be utmost reluctant to learn about
them?  How did we fail to anticipate that this would happen?

Specificaly, in the case of computer networking at home, we have a
very obvious precedent in the sector: utilities.  Internet has often
been called "the new utility," and telecommunications is the name of
the larger game.  Why do we call them utilities?  Because the users
have a highly utilitarian attitude toward them!  "Does it have a
utility?"  What benefit does it provide to me?  Okay, fine, can I just
reap the benefits and forget about the details of it?

<!-- more -->

It doesn't matter what their religious devotions are, somehow,
regardless of religious viewpoint, most people end up with a highly
utilitarian viewpoint toward home utilities.  But, as all engineers
know, this simply isn't the way utilities actually work under the
hood.  Under the hood of utilities is a whole lot of investment.  In
fact you can argue that a utility is almost nothing but investment.
The model of monthly billing to provide a service is largely a
distraction from the true essence of how utilities actually operate.

But, point in hand.  As much as this seems the least you can do to
support a utility, it is the most you can achieve when you have to
work with customers who have an extremely utilitarian attitude.  The
monthly billing provides a source of revenue to build up capital which
can then be used for major investment spending like installing new
fiber optic cable infrastructure.  At the very least, it provides a
source of money to pay maintenance personnel for routine maintenance
on the physical infrastructure that already exists.  It also provides
for paid support staff to answer all the amateur's stupid questions
they're bound to ask.  And, finally, the "cream of the crop" expense
of Internet Service Providers is tech personnel to work inside the
ISP's central office locations.

So, now that we reviewed the precedent, let's return to the underlying
philosophical questions that I've raised.  Why is it that so few
people are willing to learn about and operate a complex home network?
The answer here is obvious too, if you compare the lifestyle of a geek
to a more typical person.  Fundamentally, you can argue that geeks
have a seemingly unlimited stamina to do work.  And what is it, when I
say this, that "work" actually is?

It simply boils down to the statement of what an engineer is.  An
engineer solves problems.  Problems that that prevent "things from
working," problems that prevent people from working.  That,
fundamentally, prevent work from occurring.  The ability "to make ends
meet."  To have financial earnings matching your expenses, to be able
to communicate over long distance.  An engineer enables the ability to
accomplish work.

So, by extension, the fruit of an engineer entices people to work
harder.

This is the antithesis of what a non-engineer wants to do in life.  A
non-engineer does not want to, fundamentally, make ends meet, solve
problems, enable object to "work" and function correctly, enable other
people to do work, help other people accomplish goals, and so on.  At
the end of a work day, a non-engineer wants to "shut off" from work.
They don't want to be constantly occupied about the thought of how to
make ends meet.  At the end of the work day is their money, their
time, to be able to consume without discretion of making ends meet.
If retirement would mean the ability to have unlimited resources to
spend and zero responsibility to think about how to make ends meet,
they'd take the opportunity any day.  And for many non-engineers, this
is how they view retirement: An extended summer vacation where you can
have fun and play all day.

So, now that you understand the philosophical standpoint about what's
happening in these non-technical users mind, how are you to go about
being a geek running a network that supports a number of these
non-engineers?  Yeah, you could implement a utilitarian model to
support investments for the network.  But, no, you have to dig deeper
than that.  Don't just answer the face value question, "Can you make
things work reasonably well now?"  Answer the full question, "What is
it that these users truly want?"

When you really think about it, the full question, you'll realize that
at face value, these users don't want very much.  The existence of a
large, featureful, and functional network is just a nice-to-have.
But, ultimately, you can safely assume that given their unwillingness
to... pursue all those engineering things, they wouldn't too much mind
if they lost it all and ends weren't meeting for them, now would they?

Well, what if they did mind?  Here's the solution you, as a geek, need
to understand, the approach you need to take.  For non-engineers, the
ability to have time and money not directly related to accomplishing
work is an ecocnomic unit of its own, and that especially applies in
their own home.  In this respect, it can obviously be seen that taking
on responsibility for operating a home network is a deprivation,
rather than a great gift as us geeks see it.  But, this goes even
further than that.  Having a geek operate a home network is not a fair
trade in this system of economics because the geek appears, from a
non-engineer's standpoint, to be constantly deprived of someone ought
to have of their time outside work.

There is only one way to remedy this: have the home network operated
by professionals.  Naturally, this is going to increase the monetary
cost of the operation, but it will work in the primary form of
economics used by non-engineers.  Why?  The non-engineer will have
more time on their hands to not think about making ends meet, where
they can spend more time on entertainment and other non-productive
things they'd rather be doing.  Then in exchange for the privilege of
having this service, they have to pay for all the personal
entertainment junk in an equal quantity that can be enjoyed by the
home network operators on the other end.  That's how the concept of
fair trade for home economics comes in, even when doing so may cause
you to spend more money.

----------

In summary, there are a few key points ane takeaways for geeks to
remember from this discussion.

1. Not everyone values work equally, especially when it comes to
   higher-level concepts like enabling the ability to do work through
   technology.

2. "Making ends meet" can appear as a "vice" to some people, even
   though geeks may see this as a virtue.

3. Developing an investment-oriented mindset can be a hurdle for
   non-engineers to deal with.

4. The time, money, and ability to not be concerned with making ends
   meet, with not having to do work, is seen as an economic unit in
   its own right for non-engineers.  Capitalize on this observation to
   optimize how goods and services can be best provided to non-engineers
   in a way that constitutes a "fair trade."

   At the outset, the ability to track these measures may seem like
   extra work.  But of course, there's a solution.  Simply track all
   "work-related" activities, then what is left over is all the
   "non-work" activities.

Something needs to be said about engineers being constantly willing to
reach out and make it easier for the uninitiated to learn about
technology.  What is the logic in this?  As engineers would like to
tout (and as Linus Torvalds was once quoted in an interview), sure
although 99% of the target audience will be more focused on play,
there will be 1% who will see the value in learning how to enable work
and make it more efficient.  The biggest point here is a point of
economics.  If you can decrease the cost of that educational outreach
effort to nil, the 1% who do use the resources to learn are pure
profit.  Every single such new worker has immediate and obvious
contributions to the underlying premise of engineering: to enable work
and to make it more efficient.  And that will have obvious
implications to making the world simply run better, to making ends
meet.

So, the crux of the matter here, I've pointed the fact that the cost
of education outreach efforts is critical.  If there were a
substantial financial cost associated with these efforts, the economic
losses would be tremendous.  Likewise, the assumption of all gains
made is the pure definition of engineering, which does not necessarily
imply the return of money as profits.  It simply means, the true
passion of engineering can be further pursued, regardless of the
financials.

And, this is exactly the problem that most businesses face when it
comes to engineering.  "How can you prove these engineering efforts
will improve the bottom line financials of the business?"  When it
comes to business, it's already enough of a struggle to set short-term
engineering goals on the table.  First you have to pay for an
engineering research and development team in a way that is rather
isolated from the company's bottom-line financials, because that's not
how engineering fundamentally works.  Their short-term goal is to make
existing work the business does faster and more efficient.  The
hypothesis, from the business manager's standpoint, is that by doing
so, that increases the bottom-line for the business.  And, therefore,
it can be viewed as an area of investment.  But the busisness's bottom
line financials are actually not of primary concern for the
engineering team.

The problem for the business manager is that short-term, you're just
increasing the business's costs to pay for more employee salaries.
But, the crux for engineering is that if the craft is too closely tied
to the financials, they won't have the "breathing room" to do the
clear thinking that results in a good job.

But, we haven't yet even covered the long-term goals of engineers in
relation to the business world: to make the entire world more
efficient and productive, to enable new work to become possible, and
to empower a greater number of new engineers who can further multiply
the benefits of engineering.  The business manager is only interested
in engineering so far as it improves the financials of their business.
They are not too fond about engineering efforts improving the
financials of their competitor's businesses.  So, the business manager
wants to make the product of their engineering team proprietary, a
secret advantage of their business over the others.  And they want
that secret advantage to last forever.  But the engineer is looking
two steps ahead and sees that is no winning strategy in this chess
game: the competitor will quickly develop a similar but incompatible
secret advantage and that's actually going to result in greater costs
for our own business later in time: the engineering work that could
have been saved by improving one really solid implmentation is going
to be wasted developing several poor implementations.  And besides, if
the secret advantage lasted forever, the business manager could
promptly layoff the engineering team since they no longer are needed
for the short-term financial gains.

Finally, the fact of the matter of proprietary engineering is that it
is also counterproductive for minting new engineers.  How can new
engineers build off of the work of past engineering to further improve
efficiencies when the product of that work is not available to them?
How are they ever going to get hired to work at the company if they
don't have existing experience in that area of engineering?  You
simply can't hold onto the same engineers forever, that's not how
human livelihood works.  But still, even that business angle on an
obvious fact falls far short of engineers true long-term goal.

And finally, there is still the elusive last point that we have not
covered: to make new work become possible.  Why is this important to a
business?  If a business fails to innovate, then the world around them
will change but the business will not, and the world will buy new
products in preference to old ones.  So then there will be less and
less customers until pretty soon, the company goes out of business.
But still, that's a meager way to explaian the true intent behind
engineering to business managers.

Fundamentally, we can explain the crux of the matter this way.
Engineers will always have longer term goals than is within the scope
and purview of business managers.  To explain the importance of
engineering, you have to translate the language of how these long term
phenomenon apply to the short-term operation of a business.  Finally,
though, business managers have the last say in these matters.  Not all
businesses are equally willing to fund the future.  Overall, you can
simply summarize these observations by saying that in general,
engineering doesn't pay, unless you find some people who are actually
willing to pay.  If you can't, you need to take the matter personally
by accruing the necessary funding by some other means and then using
the monetary spend as an investment area of your own.
