---
layout: post
title: "Finding ebooks in my public library, and interesting article
        comparing physical books to ebooks"
date: 2020-09-22 09:48 -0500
author: quorten
categories: [inven-sys]
tags: [inven-sys]
---

Okay, so maybe now after COVID-19 hit, my local library has better
support for Ebooks.  Well, let's see.  Yes, indeed they do have
something very clear in the ways of support now.  They use an app
called OverDrive, that's how they manage Ebook lending.  The purpose,
of course, is to adequately support DRM.  Also, the Adobe standard
format that offers the equivalent?  Well, PDF files with DRM strings
attached, those require Adobe's new special reader, Adobe Digital
Editions (ADE), and unfortunately, it does not work on Linux.  Neither
does the OverDrive dedicated app.  But fortunately, you can read
in-browser, but that means you can't download for non-networked use.

NOTE: Digital archival collections are distinctively different than
commercially published digital books.

20200922/DuckDuckGo hennepin county digital library  
20200922/https://digitalcollections.hclib.org/digital/custom/home  
20200922/DuckDuckGo hennepin county librrary ebooks  
20200922/https://hclib.overdrive.com/  
20200922/DuckDuckGo hennepin county library overdrive  
20200922/https://www.hclib.org/browse/online-resources/online-resources-container/online-resources-section/online-resources-o-r/overdrive-digital-library

<!-- more -->

Okay, so we're almost there, we just need to push through the last
sprint of this trip.  Can you trade out a physical book for an Ebook?
That would make it super-slick to donate your books to your public
library, plus they would not need to worry so much... or maybe not at
all, about storage space, both physical and digital.

20200922/DuckDuckGo trade a physical book for an ebook  
20200922/https://www.huffpost.com/entry/shelfie-app-ebooks_n_567489fde4b0b958f656d261

Okay, so it is possible.  Reading this through, this is what I glean.
It really depends on the publisher, they each have their own terms,
whether it be redeeming the Ebook for free upon proof of the physical
book,' getting a discount, or needing to pay full price.  So this is
where app development comes into play to make it easy for users.

Now, that article linked this interesting article about comparing
reading on paper versus on screens, saying there are some subtle
advantages to reading on paper?  Really?  Well, not really, here's
why.

20200922/https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/reading-paper-screens/

So, if you read through the article, I can summarize the important
points that it makes as follows.

1. The fact that there are studies that reading on paper is more
   efficient, more accurate, or more comprehensive than reading
   digitally hinges both on technology development and on generational
   effects.

2. Related to the hardware technology aspects, printed book technology
   is simply a more mature technology than digital reading.  Earlier
   CRT monitors introduced flicker (due to being optimized for moving
   pictures) that made reading stationary text eye-straining.  TFT
   LCDs with capacitors to persistently back up pixel values during
   the entire refresh duration have improved legibility of stationary
   text, at the expense of decreasing legibility of moving pictures.
   Also, glossy monitor surfaces introduce more eye-strain than matte
   monitor surfaces.  And E-ink which is illuminated by ambient light
   rather than backlit are ideal for eye comfort during reading.

3. Scroll versus codex?  Historically, Scrolls were promptly thrown
   out as soon as the codex was introduced because it was
   technologically superior due to the ability to quickly access any
   page at random, as opposed to linear-access scrolls.  But
   apparently, the advantage of the codex goes further than that.
   From studies of the modern digital world, paginated media is touted
   as easier to read than scrolled media because it provides more
   "landmarks" by which to navigate particular locations in the
   textual information.

4. Related to the software technology aspects, another issue found was
   that not all Ebook readers use the best possible user interface
   design.  Poorly designed Ebook user interfaces contribute to more
   cognitive overhead and less comprehension while reading.  In
   particular, not having a clear sense of position in the writing in
   scrolled media is a challenge.

   Likewise, some folks really like to highlight and take notes
   directly in the books that they read, but lots of digital software
   falls short in providing an equivalent interface in this regard.  I
   personally disparage at this practice because the book can no
   longer be resold as similar to new.  And besides, most of us go
   through elementary school where it is strictly forbidden since it
   is the school's goal to reuse the books year-over-year.

5. Not all readers come to books because they are truly motivated in
   the act of reading in its own right.  Especially, in the case of
   primary school and secondary school where it is not uncommon for
   reading and learning to happen "under duress."  The lack of
   providing for sufficient physical distractions like dimensions,
   weight, page thickness, texture, tactile feel, smell, and even
   taste causes some readers to steer away from Ebooks.

   As the running joke among my close family calls it, this is the
   "grape-throwing."  Don't play with your food!  So therefore, don't
   "food" around with your books!

6. Finally, the generational aspect.  It is hypothesized that current
   generation readers go into reading with a less serious.  However,
   we have no reason to believe that this will continue to be true
   with the next generation, who is being trained to interact with
   computers differently from a young age.  Yes... you do have to
   understand that it can take quite a while for those
   non-technologists to learn simple lessons that we have already
   learned and have ingrained decades earlier.

7. Keep in mind, when the studies find differences, they truly are
   focused on "slight" differences.  Point in hand, paper is not
   compellingly better than digital unless you have a very strong
   technology-based reason to support otherwise.

In any case, I have to agree that the points raised for technology
improvement are good solid points.  They are something that any
technology designer needs to keep in mind when they create software
that supports the act of reading.  Interestingly enough, when watching
videos, people do not have so much of the expectation of seeing a
clear progress indicator while performing the act.  If they do want to
get that information, though, they would have checked the run time of
the video/movie themself in advance, and they can check their own
personal watch or time-keeping device to know how much farther the end
is from where they are currently.

----------

Now, for my really personal commentary.  One of the biggest things I
disliked about professionally published, printed books is that there
is such a big divide between what you see them able to put on paper
versus what you put on paper.  The fact of the matter as we know it
is, all printed published books are authored on computers.  Don't get
me wrong!  I mean, how else are you going to have a typeset book?  It
has to be typed into a computer.  Without the author typing directly
into a computer, you need a secretary or a machine to transcribe, a
secretary costs money, and it's even beside the point.  The point is
that if you write on paper, you do not see the result in a form that
equals what is printed in a professionally published book.  And that
is the direct point I take issue with.

So, if you're going to read the result of someone typing on a
computer, or the transcription of a computer for that matter, why not
read the result in its most direct form, on a computer?  That way, you
are closest to the equivalent media authoring abilities for the sake
of writing.  The only true, direct way to read and write on paper is
handwriting.  Or, if you're really old skool, typewriters.

Matter of fact, that's one of the reasons why I was so eager to be
exclusive to digital publication.  Come on, going through school in
the 2000s, I knew that all those published books we worked with, they
were authored on computers.  That's how all typesetting was done in
those days.  All this being said, I can conclude by saying I despise
adding unnecessary layers and middlemen between the author and the
reader.

Sure, the whole idea with publishing is that in order to make copies,
it is necessary to add some intermediate middle layers.  But still, my
emphasis is the same: when it is necessary, those middle layers should
be kept as thin as possible.

----------

Okay, but wait, the final torture test of Ebooks in libraries.
Suppose you trade-in donate a physical book to an Ebook in your local
public library in Minnesota.  Then you move to Oklahoma, and you want
to be able to checkout the same book you've donated.  Can you request
the ebook from Minnesota to your Oklahoma public library through an
inter-library loan?  The flat-out answer that universities give, in
general, no.  Publishers often impose licensing restrictions on Ebooks
that explicitly deny this.

However, one curious alternation on these terms and conditions is the
restriction that inter-library loans can only be done on individual
chapters, not full books.  And this only applies when a book is not
specified as required course materials ina college class syllabus.

So, at the end of the day, the whole established process of getting
books into libraries and accessing them therein, Ebook licensing
restrictions provide a thorny thicket to navigate that basically
invalidate the old standard practice.  If you do want this economic
pipeline, you are recommended to primarily use physical books and only
use Ebooks as a last resort.

DuckDuckGo ebook interlibrary loan  
https://help.oclc.org/Resource_Sharing/WorldShare_Interlibrary_Loan/Troubleshooting/How_to_create_an_eBook_ILL_request  
https://ncu.libguides.com/ebooks/ill  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233477879_Ebooks_and_Interlibrary_Loan_Licensed_to_Fill  
https://scholars.ttu.edu/en/publications/oh-the-possibilities-ebook-lending-and-interlibrary-loan-6  
https://umd.libanswers.com/faq/219050
