---
layout: post
title: "Year 1920 problem on classic Macintoshes, multisync monitor
        signals, paint removal, soldering"
date: 2020-02-15 22:35 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [mac-classic, raspberry-pi]
tags: [mac-classic, raspberry-pi]
---

I've taken a look at 68kMLA, and of course I've found some useful
information worth saving.

This is an interesting article about some versions of the Macintosh
system software showing the year 1920 instead of the proper year 2020.
Noteworthy is that a control panel extension named SetDate can be used
to work around setting the correct date even in the face of this
problem.

20200215/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/58616-the-2020-experience/

This is a very interesting thread about using a video expansion card
that gives color graphics!  Micron Xceed is the name of the game.  It
also covers some very useful information about sync signals.  One good
thing to note.  A typical multisync CRT monitor will accept and
process sync-on-green signals just as well as it can process separate
sync signals.  Yeah, that's right.  If you've got a robust and
flexible monitor, all you need to do is send composite video + sync
signal to the monitor down the right pins, no software processing or
signal reconditioning required.  For this sake, there are adapters
where you simply set the right DIP switches to adapt between an Apple
DB-15 connector to a VGA connector.

Also note, if you have a really good multisync LCD monitor, you can
use that just the same as you'd use a multisync CRT monitor.

<!-- more -->

20200215/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/56731-se30-micron-xceed-video-card-db-15-to-vga/

Wow, this is a nice article on paint removal tips and tricks.
Applying carnauba wax is one great trick that works for removing
lacquer based spray paint, but it will not work for acrylic spray
paint.  And of course there's other tricks.

20200215/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/58814-aiii-ugly-paint/

This discussion contains some helpful advice on soldering.  Please
note that when you solder to fatter traces, it will take a little
longer to heat things up, so don't panic.  This is necessary to get
things going.

20200216/https://68kmla.org/forums/index.php?/topic/58554-broken-solder-joints/
