---
layout: post
title: "Measuring the value of time outside of work, revisited"
date: 2021-01-15 21:13 -0600
author: quorten
categories: [personal-finance, home-network, covid19]
tags: [personal-finance, home-network, covid19]
---

Previously, I've raised the unanswered question.  How do you measure
the value of people's time outside of working hours?  The question of
valuation inside working hours is easy: the hourly rate or salary is
used to determine how much a specific labor task is valued at.  But
time outside of work, that's a trickier value proposition.  But,
after thinking through first principles carefully, I have an answer.

So, let's start with the basics.  Labor outside the economic system.

* A person can labor to gather natural resources.

* A person can own resources, these are now considered "artificial"
  resources.

* A person can labor to transform natural resources.

* A person can labor to return resources to nature.

Here, the exchange is only between one person and the rest of the
natural world, without respect to exchanges between persons.  Now,
exchanges between people can be classified as follows, still without
the definition of money.

* A person can gain a good or service from another person.

* A person can loose a good or service to another person.

<!-- more -->

This is solely in regard to what can happen on the physical level.  It
says nothing about human desires.  So, that's the next definitions.

* A person can desire a good or service.

* A person can want to get rid of a good or service.

* A person can agree with the transfer of a good or service.

* A person can disagree with the transfer of a good or service.

* Generally, person A will agree to transfer a resource to person B if
  person A does not want the resource and person B wants the resource.
  But this is not always the case, there can be other reasons for
  agreement/disagreement.

* If person A gains a good or service that belonged to person B, but
  person B did not agree with the transfer, then person A stole the
  resource from person B.

* If person A looses a good or service to person B, but person B did
  not agree with the transfer, then person A "garbage-dumped" the
  resource or "tampered" the service onto person B.

* An agreed transfer of a resource between people is the basis of
  higher-level concepts.

But wait, what is a good or a service?

* A good: a transfer of a physical object.

* A service: Primarily performing labor, the transformation of
  physical objects, on behalf of physical objects already owned by
  someone else.

So now, there are further classifications of agreed transfers of
resources between people.

* Gift/donation: Any agreed exchange of a resource where one party is
  clearly the beneficiary at the expense of the other party clearly
  being at a loss.

* Trade: An exchange of resources where each party gains and looses a
  resource, which, furthermore, the economic value of the resources is
  agreed to be equal.

Trade is the basis of money.  Money is primarily a tangible object,
such as salt or gold, for measuring fair trade by the weight of its
quantity.  Physical money can be replaced with a symbolic
representation of this quantity, this is _currency_ rather than money.

In an early, relatively undeveloped society, it is understood that
money and trade are games that people voluntarily choose to play, but
ultimately, you can still live without money.  So, what are the causes
of the invention of living expenses?  It is the overwhelming
preference of a society to obtain some key resources from businesses
rather than nature, businesses that charge a nominal fee for their
goods and services.

* Agriculture as a business: Food is provided for a price.

* Materials as a business: Wood, cloth, stones, metal, you name it.
  If it's a physical object that can be collected from nature then
  used to build other useful objects, it can be obtained for a nominal
  price.

* Land permits as a business: Land is owned by a government or
  landlord, and permission to use the land is granted for a price.

* Construction as a business: Housing is built for a price.  Roads are
  built for a price.  Usually, governments, landlords, and banks with
  a steady income from weekly/monthly payments are in the best
  permission to pay construction teams directly.

* The existence of lots of commercial business activity in a society
  incentivizes the creation of governments that tax in a method
  similar to how the businesses charge for their goods and services.

So basically, the last point I wanted to put out is this.  If you have
a lot of businesses crop up that make money from rental properties,
but there is no existing land tax, the government might update its
terms so that land ownership is taxed.  Then some people may have a
new baseline living expense that they must pay.  But at the same time,
you can argue that most people were already preferring to live in a
way that required them to pay like that anyways, so it's not that much
different.

So now, the baseline expectation is that you have living expenses, how
you are going to get the money to pay for them?  Although you could
obtain the money from a multitude of various commercial transactions,
the primary idea behind the creation of these businesses is that they
focus on performing a specific, specialized task.  And in order to
produce sufficient output to cover everyone in society, it takes a
large group of people performing the same specialized task that
underlies the business.  Therefore, as part of being a member of these
businesses who gets paid, you would perform the same specialized task
for as many hours of the day as you can reasonably muster.

Thus follows the invention of work-life balance.  What is the
practical limit on the number of hours that can be worked?  For
agriculture, it environmental conditions set the practical limits:
it's pretty hard to do agricultural field work without sunlight,
especially without modern artificial lighting technology.  In more
modern times, now that we have sufficient technology to eliminate the
limiting environmental factors, a new limit has become extremely
obvious: humans tire out and need to sleep.  Although this was known
during ancient times, it did not so frequently feature in the mind of
running the business world because there were always more immediate
issues to worry about, like simply tiring out from physical labor.

But, with modern mechanical technology and the modern knowledge worker
economy, tiring out from physical labor is no longer the primary
concern.  The primary concern is the brain tiring out from mental
labor.

So, herein defines the general limits of the modern worker's time
commitments, give or take.

* 8 hours full-time working hours
* Incidental basis, a few hours overtime
* 3 hours meal breaks and getting ready for work/sleep in the
  morning/evening
* 1 hour additional physical exercise, for jobs that only involve
  limited physical motion
* 2 hours max additional motor vehicle commute time that's not counted
  as part of the job
* 8 hours sleep

With overtime and a long commute not billed on company time, there's
not a single hour remaining in the day for anything else.  Most people
would consider this an outrageous regimen.  Your typical modern worker
will have at least 4 hours "free time," of which many will like to
devote 2 hours as "family time" (give or take).

But, the fully modern question.  2 hours?  4 hours?  That's still
quite a lot of time, that's enough to slip in another quarter-time or
half-time job into your day.  What are you doing with all that time?

Now, this circles back to my previous article I've written about
engineering, home networks, and utilities.  Entertainment is a prime
choice, especially when they have spare money to spend on it.

But now, to answer the ultimate question.  What if instead of using
that time for entertainment, it is used for more productive endeavors
without pay?  Or, alternately, how would you measure the value of the
time spent as entertainment when you don't have a baseline labor pay
metric to compute with?

As you must understand, it is a very modern idea to be able to measure
time slices out of a person's day and assign a commercial value to
them.  This is all based off of the assumption of a highly commercial
economy and lifestyle that even makes the mode of thinking "time is
money" so universally feasible.  Time isn't, fundamentally, money.  It
is simply usable as a means to compute money for many jobs in modern
businesses.

You see, what we're getting to here is actually quite far displaced
from the primary definition of money.  This isn't a matter of
measuring fair trade, this is a matter of measuring how one person
spends their time.

* For their employer, the market, the rest of society

* For their family

* For themself

When you interact with an external market, of course there will be net
gains and losses.  But when you spend your time for yourself as the
customer, that is net-zero, there is no gain or loss in money when you
both provide and consume goods and services for yourself.  If the
family is treated as a single economic unit, that means all goods and
services from the family to the family are also net-zero.

Okay, but I'm trying to figure this out, though.  What service is it,
exactly, that you are selling to and buying yourself when you give
yourself free time for entertainment?  Well, it takes a stretch of
imagination to answer this question, but we can draw from demanding
jobs in the modern world to get an answer.

Take, for example, transcontinental truck drivers.  These are people
who must spend several days out on the road, away from home.  How many
hours a day do they spend on their job?  Well, you could argue,
technically it is 24 hours!  Properly taking breaks and getting proper
sleep is considered part of the job.  You could just as well bill this
as company time.  So, here we are, you can sell your sleep time and
exercise breaks to the interest of an employer!  These activities,
therefore, do in fact have a market value.

What about personal entertainment time spend for watching a movie?
How can that have a market value?  Well, the first thing that comes to
mind is comparing with professional movie critics, these are people
who get paid to watch movies.

It's important to understand that the reason why most workers don't
get paid for their time outside of work is because they don't want to
be.  The philosophical idea is that they want to maximize their time
available outside of work.  So, by passing this time to "their" time
rather than their employer's time or customer's time, naturally that
means they don't get paid for it, the money transfer is net-zero.

----------

A lot of what we've covered primarily hinged upon the idea of
agreement.  This is all based off of business and commerce, so
agreement is the mandatory baseline.  However, the note I've mentioned
near the very beginning is that agreement does not necessarily entail
desire.  What is it that people really want?

* Do people want fair trade?

* Do people want to provide useful goods and services to other
  people?

* Do people want to receive useful goods and services from other
  people?

* Do people want the ability to loan out money to those who need it?
  Do people want the power to settle debts?

* Or do people want to simply unplug from this whole modern economy
  and have their own time for relaxation and entertainment?

From a commercial standpoint, the thing that's really special about
what people really want is that they are likely willing to pay more
for what they really want than for things that they merely agree to
but don't really want.  However, it's always important to remember
that wanting something and wanting to pay for something are two
different things.  Well, we usually say "willing to pay" because many
people would more than like to have things but not have to pay for
them.

The big point I wanted to put forward here is something that I call an
"alternate hypothesis of economics."  People don't primarily work to
earn money, to earn the ability to trade fairly, they primarily work
to earn "relaxation and entertainment," which can be treated as a
currency of its own.  They work to obtain the resources that are used
to buy time away from work and to buy entertainment for themself.

To some extent, this can work as a system of economics.  "If I
entertained you, it's fair that you entertain me back."  You pay those
who entertain you, and you get paid when you entertain someone else.
But in general, entertainment alone is not enough to make ends meet in
a full economy with businesses providing for other life essentials.

But, this model does work very well to explain useful incentives and
motivations when working with other people in the business world,
where not everyone is self-motivated to do work.  "I'll buy you
vacation if you get this task done for me."  "It's a deal!"

And retirement?  If retirement is the idea of an extended summer
vacation at the end of your lifetime, which it is in the modern world,
who wouldn't want to work primarily to obtain that?  The ability to
not have anyone else tell you what to do, it's all your time, and you
have plenty of money to spend on fun and games.  That is what are
working for.  Not fair trade, not the power to settle debts, none of
that business-minded nonsense.  The ability to have all of the
benefits of the modern business world but none of the
responsibilities, that is what they want.

Nowadays, when home life has become highly commercialized, it's
important to understand this alternate hypothesis of economics and
integrate the reasoning with your business model if you are selling to
home users.  When you understand the motivations of the market well,
you are better positioned to optimize what they really want, and also
provide goods and services to them in a more fair-trade manner than
would be the case were you measuring the wrong parameter.

Finally, one point that I must finish off relating to the idea of home
networks.  Part of the reason why engineers want to run their own home
network is because their ISP can't do it well enough.  Why is this?
After all of my discussion thus far, there are a few different types
of users that you have to cater to differently to run a home network
well.

* Engineering/research users.  These users want full tech specs and
  the ability to customize.

* Business operational uesrs.  Your typical "work from home" employee
  post-pandemic (COVID-19).  These users are focused primarily on
  minimizing disruptions and downtime, but they don't really care
  about the tech specs of the network, just that it provides a route
  to the Internet so they can connect their VPN.

* Home users, off work hours.  Relaxation and entertainment is the
  primary focus.

The problem is that ISPs typically focus on only one category,
typically business or home, but not both.  And, definitely, not
engineering/research.
